श्रीसीतारमचन्द्राभ्यां नम:

श्रीमद्रामीकीयरामायणम्

बालकाण्डम्

Śrimad Vālmiki-Rāmāyaṇa

Book One

(Balakanḍa)

प्रथम: सर्ग:

Canto I

The celestial sage Nārada narrates to Vālmiki the Story of Śri Rāma in a nutshell

उं० तप:स्वाध्यायनिरतं तपस्वी वार्षिवदां वरम्।

नारद परिपप्रच्छ वाल्मीकर्मीनपुङ्गवम् ॥ 1  ॥

The ascetic Vālmiki put the following question direct to Narada, the chief of hermits, nay, the foremost of those skilled in expression, who remains ever engaged in askesis and self-study—the study of the Vedas: (1)

को स्विस्न साम्प्रतं लोक गुणावान् कछु घौर्वयान्।

धर्मप्रछ कृतप्रछ सत्यवाक्यो दृढ़वत: ॥ 2  ॥

"Who can possibly be full of virtues in this world at present? Nay, who is possessed of prowess and knows what is right? Who is conscious of services done, truthful of speech and firm of resolve? (2)

चारित्रेण च को युक्तः सर्वभृतेषु को हितः ।

विद्धान् कः कः समर्थ कश्रेकप्रियद्धः ॥ 3  ॥

"Who is possessed of right conduct and who is friendly to all living beings? Who is a man of knowledge? Nay, who is powerful and who has a singularly lovable appearance? (3)

आसावान को जितकौंधी धुलिमान् को उनसूयकः ।

कस्य विध्यति देवाङ्ग जातरोषस्य संयुगे ॥ 4  ॥

"Who has subdued his self? Who has conquered anger? Who is possessed of splendour and who is above fault-finding, and whom do the very gods dread when his wrath has been (apparently) provoked in battle? (4)

एतदिष्ठभ्यहं श्रोत् परं कौतूललं हि मे।

महर्षे त्वं समर्थोसि ज्ञातुमेवंविधं नरम् ॥।   ॥

"I wish to hear this; for there is a great curiosity in my mind about it, while you are capable of knowing such a man, O eminent seer!" (5)

श्रुत्वा चैतलिलोकजो वाल्यीकेनांरदो चरः ।

श्रूतात्मित चामन्य प्रहुते वाक्यमब्रवीत् ॥ 6  ॥

Hearing this appeal of Välmiki, the sage Nārada, who possessed knowledge of the three worlds, said, “Listen!” and greatly delighted, addressed the following words: (6)

बह्वो दुर्वर्भार्वेवे चे त्वया कांतिता गृणा: ।

मुने वक्ष्याम्बहं बुद्ध्या तैरुंक: श्रूयतां नर: ॥ 7  ॥

"I shall duly consider and tell you of such a hero. Be pleased to hear from me of the man endowed with the manifold and

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

rare virtues that have been described by you. (7)

इक्ष्वाकुवंशप्रभवो रामो नाम जनै: श्रूत: 1

नियतात्मा महावीर्वों द्युतिमान् धृतिमान् वर्गी || ८ ||

"There is one descended in the line of Ikswāku, and known by the name of 'Rāma'. He has fully controlled his mind, is very powerful, radiant and resolute and has brought his senses under control. (8)

बृद्धिमान् नौतिमान् वामी श्रीमाञ्छगुनिशर्भहुः। विपुलांसो महाबाहुः कम्बुयीवो महाहुन: ॥ 9  ॥

"He is intelligent, sagacious, eloquent, glorious and an exterminator of foes. He is distinguished with broad shoulders, powerful arms, a neck shaped as a conch and a stout chin. (9)

महोरक्को महेष्वासो गृहजूररिंदमः। आजानुबाहुः सुशिरा: सुललाटः सुविक्रमः ॥ 10  ॥

"He is marked with a broad chest, a mighty bow and a collar-bone covered with flesh, and is capable of subduing his foes. His unusually long arms extend right upto his knees. He has a well-formed head, a shapely forehead and a charming gait. (10)

समः समविभक्ताङ्गः निरभवर्ग: प्रतपावान्।

पीनवक्षा विशालाक्षो लक्ष्मीवाङ्छुभलक्षण: ॥ 11  ॥

"He is of medium stature, neither very tall nor very short, has well-proportioned limbs, has a shining complexion, is mighty, has a rounded chest, large eyes, is full of splendour and has auspicious marks on his body. (11)

धर्मज्ञ: सत्यसंधक्ष प्रजानां च हिते रतः । यशस्वी ज्ञानसम्पत्रः शुचिवंश्यः स्माधिधान्।। 12  ॥

"He knows the secret of virtue, and is true to his promise and intent on the good of the people. He is illustrious, full of wisdom, pure in his dealings, a man of self-control and concentrated mind. (12)

प्रजापतिसमः श्रीमान् धाता रिपुणिनुपूद्धतः।

रक्षिता जीवलोकस्य धर्मस्य परिरक्षिता ॥ 13  ॥

"He is a supporter of the creation like Brahmā, the lord of created beings, affluent, the slayer of his enemies, a protector of living beings and a staunch defender of faith. (13)

रक्षिता स्वस्य धर्मेस्य स्वजनस्य च रक्षिता।

वेदवेदाङ्गतत्त्वज्ञे धनवैदे च निष्ठित: ॥ 14  ॥

"He is a vindicator of his own virtue and the protector of his own people. He knows the truth of the Vedas and the six sciences (grammar etc.) auxiliary to them and is a past master in archery. (14)

सर्वशास्त्रार्थतत्त्वज्ञ: स्मृतिमान् प्रतिभानवान्।

सर्वलोकप्रिय: साधुर्वीनात्मा विच्बक्षणः ॥ 15  ॥

"He knows the real meaning of all the scriptures, is possessed of a sharp memory and quick wit. He is popular in all the worlds, is pious, high-minded and shrewd. (15)

सर्वदोभिपगत: सद्विः समुद्र इव सिभूर्भिः ।

आर्यै: सर्वसमश्चेव सदैव प्रियदर्शनः ॥ 16  ॥

"He is always sought by the righteous even as the ocean is by rivers. He is noble, nay, alike to all and always wears a pleasing countenance. (16)

स च सर्वगुणोपेतः क्रोसल्यानन्दवर्धनः।

समूद्र इव ग्राभ्योर्ये धैर्यैण हिमवानपि ॥ 17  ॥

"He is endowed with all excellences and enhances the delight of his mother, Kausalyā. He vies with the ocean in profundity and compares with the Himalaya in point of firmness. (17)

विण्णा सदूगो वीर्ये सोमवल्रियदर्शनः ।

कालावान्सदूगः कोधे क्षमया पृथिवीसमः ॥ 18  ॥

"He is a replica of Lord Vişnu in prowess and is pleasing of aspect as the moon. In (show of) anger, he resembles the destructive fire at the end of creation and is a counterpart of Mother Earth in forbearance. (18)

धनदेन समस्यामे सत्ये धर्म इवापर:।

तमेवंगुलमम्पत्र रामं सत्यपराकमम् ॥ 19  ॥

ज्येष्टं ज्येष्टगुणैयुर्के प्रियं द्वराश्य: सुम्। प्रकृतीनां हितैयुक्तं प्रकृतिप्रियकाव्यथा ॥ 20  ॥



यौवराज्येन संयोक्तृमैच्छत् प्रीत्या महापित:।

तत्थाशिषेकस्म्यभारान् दूढ़ा भायांथे कैकवी। 21 1 ।।

पूर्व दत्तवरा देवी वरमेनमयाचरा।

विवासनं च रामस्य भरतस्याधिषेचनम्। 22 1 ।।

"He equals Kubera (the god of riches, the bestower of wealth) in liberality and is another Dharma, the god of piety, as it were, in point of truthfulness.

"With intent to gratify the people, the king, Emperor Daśaratha, lovingly sought to invest with the office of Regent his beloved son, Śri Rāma, who possessed unfailing prowess and was adorned with the aforesaid qualities, who was not only the eldest of his four sons in point of age, but was also endowed with the highest virtues and devoted to the interests of the people. Witnessing the preparations in connection with the installation of Śri Rāma, the illustrious Queen Kaikeyi, the youngest of the three principal consorts of Emperor Daśaratha, who had been granted a boon by Emperor on a former occasion (in recognition of her outstanding personal courage and service to her husband on the field of battle) however, asked of him in lieu of the promised boon the exile of Śri Rāma and the installation of Bharata, her own son. (19-22)

स सत्यवचनाद् राजा धर्माधशेन संघतः।

विवासयामास सुतं रामं दशरथः प्रियम् ॥ 23  ॥

"Bound as he was by the tie of duty in the form of his plighted word, due to his ever speaking the truth, King Daśaratha exiled his beloved son, Rāma. (23)

स जगाम वनं वीरः प्रतिज्ञानपुणालय्।

पितृत्वैचननिर्देशगत् केकैयमः प्रियकारणात् ॥ 24  ॥

"In obedience to his father's command in the form of the boon granted by him in favour of Kaikeyi and with a view to pleasing Kaikeyi (his stepmother), the heroic Rama retired to the woods in order to implement the pledge of his father. (24)

तं प्रजन्तं प्रियो भाता लक्ष्मणोउजगामा ह।

सेवहाद् विनयसमयम्न: सुमित्रानन्दवधिन: ॥ 25  ॥

भातर दयितो भातु: सौभात्रमनुदर्शयन्।

गामस्य दयिता भार्या नित्यं प्राणसमा हिता ॥ 26  ॥

जनकस्य कुले जाता देवाययेव निर्मिता ।

सर्वलक्षणसम्यम्बा नारीणाम्नुता वधु: ॥ 27  ॥

सीतायनुगत्या रामं शश्रिनं रोहिणी यथा।

पौरैरनुगतो दूरं पिता दर्शरथेन च ॥ 28  ॥

"His loving younger brother, Lakṣmana—who enhanced the delight of his own mother, Sumitrā, the younger of the two other principal consorts of Emperor Daśaratha and who was not only adorned with modesty but a favourite of his brother Śri Rāma—followed his aforesaid brother out of affection as the latter set out on his journey to the forest, thus testifying to his amicable relationship. Śri Rāma's wedded spouse, Sitā, (so-called because she was unearthed from the track of a ploughshare)—who was dear to him as life and was ever friendly to him, who, though not born in the ordinary way from a mother's womb, was taken as descended in the line of Janaka (a king of Mithilā, Siradhwaja by name, Janaka being his family title), was endowed with all auspicious marks on her person and was a veritable jewel among women and who looked like the Lord's own wonderful potency manifested by the Lord Himself—also accompanied Śri Rāma as Rohinī (the spouse of the moon-god, also a constellation of that name, follows the moon-god). Nay, he was followed afar by the citizens of Ayodhyā as well as by his aged father, Daśaratha. (25-28)

शूज्वेपुरे सूतं गृज्ञाल्ले व्यसर्जित्।

गृह्मासाथ धर्मात्मा निष्पादाधियर्ति प्रियम् ॥ 21  ॥

गृह्न सहितो रामो लक्ष्मणेन च सीताया ।

ते वनेन वर्ग नाला नदीसतीलां बहुद्रकाः ॥ 30  ॥

चित्रकूटमनुप्राय भरद्वाजस्य शासनात्।

रत्यमावसर्थ कृत्वा रममाणा वने जयः ॥ 31  ॥

देवास्थर्वसंकाशास्ततः ने व्यवसन् सुखम्।

चित्रकूटं गते रामे पुत्रशोकातुरस्तदा ॥ 32  ॥

राजा दशराशः खर्गे जगाम विलपन् सुर्मा।

गते तु तत्स्मन् भरतो वसिष्ठप्रमुखेक्षिङ्गे: ॥ 33  ॥



नियुस्थमानो राज्याय नैच्छट्र राज्यं महाबल:।

स जगाम वर्न वीरो रामपादप्रसादक: ॥ 34  ॥

"Meeting his beloved Guha, the chief of the Nisādas (a mixed tribe sprung from a Brāhmaṇa through a Śūdra woman), at Śrṅgavevapura on the bank of the Gaṅgā, Śrī Rāma, who was virtue-incarnate, accompanied by Guha, Lakṣmana and Sītā, sent away the charioteer back to Ayodhyā. Going from forest to forest, and crossing streams containing deep water, they saw the sage Bharadwaja at Prayāga and, dismissing Guha there, later on reached Citrakūta according to the instructions of sage Bharadwaja and, erecting a lovely cottage, the three sojourned happily there sporting in the woods like gods and Gandharvas (celestial musicians). Śrī Rāma having proceeded to Citrakūta on foot as reported by the charioteer, who had since returned to Ayodhyā, Emperor Daśaratha forthwith gave up the ghost and ascended to heaven bewailing his son, stricken as he was with grief at his separation from the latter. Though being urged to accept the throne by the Brāhmanas headed by sage Vasīsha (the family priest and preceptor of the kings of Ayodhyā), on the king having departed to the other world, Bharata, who was very powerful, did not covet the throne. He proceeded to the forest in order to please the venerable Rāma and persuade him to return to Ayodhyā and accept his father's throne. (29-34)

गत्वा तु स महात्मानं रामं सत्यपराक्रमम्।

अयाचद् धातरं राममार्थभावपुरस्कृत: ॥ 35  ॥

"Approaching the high-souled Rāma of unfailing prowess, Bharata, rich in noble sentiments, actually implored Śrī Rāma, his elder brother, accordingly. (35)

ल्यमेव राजा धर्मज्ञ इति रामं वचोउज्वीत्।

रामो.सि परमेदारः सुमुखः सुमहायशा: ॥ 36  ॥ न चैच्छत् पितृगतेशाद्र राम्यं रामो महावलः ।

पादुके चास्य रान्याय न्यासं दत्त्वा पुनः पुनः ॥ 37  ॥

निवर्तीयामास ततो भरतं भरताग्रजः ।

स काममनवाप्यैव रामपादावुपस्युगन् ॥ 38  ॥

"He addressed the following words to Śrī Rāma: 'Let you alone be the ruler, since you know what is right.' In deference to his father's decree (boon conferring the throne of Ayodhyā on Bharata) Śrī Rāma too, who was supremely magnanimous and enjoyed a very great renown, and who always wore a gracious aspect, did not hanker for the kingdom. Nay, handing over to Bharata his own pair of wooden sandals as his token of love and urging Bharata to rule over the kingdom, Śrī Rāma, Bharata's elder brother, who was possessed of great might, persuaded him to return from Citrakūṭa by repeated importunities. Without realizing his ambition (of seeing Śrī Rāma back in Ayodhyā and crowning him king), Bharata returned to Ayodhyā, touching the feet of Śrī Rāma and taking leave of him. (36-38)

नन्दिगामेउकरीरु राज्यं रामागमनाकाइक्षया।

ते तु भरते श्रीमान् सत्यसंधी जितेन्द्रिय: ॥ 31  ॥

गामस्तु पुरालक्ष्य नागरस्य जनस्य च।

तत्रागमनमेकारी दण्डकान्न प्रविवेश ह३॥ 40 ॥

"Longing for the return of Śrī Rāma, he ruled over the kingdom while living at Nandigrāma, a lonely retreat fourteen miles away from Ayodhyā. When Bharata, however, had left, the glorious Śrī Rāma of unfailing vow, who had conquered his senses and was intent on one object, viz., that of implementing the pledge of his father, entered the Dāndaka forest, they say, anticipating the renewed visit of the people of Ayodhyā to that region (of Citrakūṭa). (39-40)

प्रविष्य तु महारपयं रामो राजीवलोचन: ।

विराधं राक्षसं हत्वा शरभढ़े ददर्शं हू ।। 41  ॥

सुतीक्ष्णं चाच्यास्त्वं च अगस्तवभातरं तथा।

अगस्तवचनाच्चे जग्रहैरं शरसनम् ॥ 42  ॥

खड्गं च परमप्रीतसृणी चाक्षयसायको ।

वसतलस्य साम्यव यने वनचरैः सह ॥ 43  ॥

ऋषयोरप्रभागम् सर्वे बधायामुरक्षसाम्।

स तेषां प्रतिशुशाव राक्षसानां तदा वने ॥ 44  ॥



प्रतिज्ञात्र श्रमेण वधः संयति रक्षसाम।।

ऋषीणामिनकल्यानां एउड़कारणयवासिनाम् ॥ 45  ॥

"Entering the great forest of Dandaka and having despatched the ogre Virádha, the lotus-eyed Rāma saw one after another the sages Śarabhaṅga and Suttikṣna as well as Agastya and his brother (Idhmavāhana). Nay, at the instance of Agastya himself he accepted with supreme delight a bow, a sword, a pair of quivers containing an inexhaustible stock of arrows, all bestowed upon the sage by Indra, the lord of paradise. While the aforesaid Rāma was sojourning in the forest with foresters, all the seers dwelling in the forest called on him with a request to make short work of the demons and ogres haunting the forest. In the presence of those seers dwelling in the forest of Dandāka and glorious as fire, Śri Rama then vowed to kill the ogres in that forest. Nay, the destruction of the ogres in an encounter was solemnly promised by Rāma. (41-45)

तेन तदैव वस्ता जनस्थानिवासिनि।

विरूपिता शूर्यणखा राक्षसी कामस्टिपणी ॥ 46  ॥

"The ogress Sūrapanakhā (so called because the monstress possessed nails as big as a winnowing fan), who dwelt in Janasthāna (a portion of the Dandaka forest) and was capable of assuming any form at will, was disfigured by Śri Rāma (by having her nose and ears lopped off by Lakṣmana) while living in that very forest. (46)

ततः शूपेणखावाक्याद्युक्तान् सर्वराक्षसान्।

खरं विश्रासे चैव दूर्णणं चैव राक्षसम् ॥ 47  ॥

निजघान रणे रामस्तेषां चैव पदानुगान्।

वने तस्मिन् निवसता जनस्थाननिवासिनाम् ॥ 48  ॥

रक्षसां निहतान्यसन् महश्वाणि चतुर्दैग।

ततो जातिवधे श्रुवा रावण: क्रोधामूच्छितः ॥ 49  ॥

सहायं वरयामासि मारीचं नाम राक्षसम्।

वार्यमाण: सुबहुशो मारीचेन स रावण: ॥ 50  ॥

न विरोधो बलवता क्षमो रावण तेन ते ।

अनावून्य तु तद्वाक्यं रावण: कालचोहितः ॥ 51  ॥

जगाम सहमारीचस्तस्याभ्रमपदं तदा।

तेन मायाविना दूरमपवाहु नृपात्मजौ ॥ 52  ॥

जहार भार्याँ रामस्य गुधं हत्या जटायुषम्।

गुधं च निहतं द्वृष्टा हतां श्रुला च मैथिलीम् ॥ 53  ॥

राघव: शोकसंतमो विल्लापाकुलेन्द्रय: ।

ततसेनेव शोकेन गुधं दर्शया जटायुषम् ॥ 54  ॥

मार्गमाणो वने सीतां राक्षसं संदर्भर्ग ह।

ककव्यं नाम रूपेण विकृतं घोरदर्शनम् ॥ 55  ॥

“Śrī Rāma then killed on the field of battle all the ogres that came prepared for an encounter at the instigation of Śūrpanakhā, including their leaders Khara, Trísirā and the ogre Duṣana as also their followers. No less than fourteen thousand of ogres dwelling in Janasthāna were made short work of by Rāma while sojourning in that forest. Stupefied through anger to hear of the destruction of his kinsmen, Rāvaṇa, the king of Laṅkā, sought the help of a fellow-ogre (one of the two sons of the ogress Tāḍakā), Marica by name. Though repeatedly discouraged by Mārica saying, “It is not advisable for you to make enemies with that powerful prince, Śri Rāma, O Rāvana!” yet turning a deaf ear to his advice and impelled by death, the aforesaid Rāvaṇa, who made people scream (in terror wherever he went out on expedition) then proceeded to the site of Rāma’s hermitage along with Mārica. Having caused the two princes, Śri Rāma and Laksmana, to be removed afar from the hermitage by the wily Mārica, he abducted Śri Rāma’s spouse, Sitā, fatally wounding the vulture, Jatāyu, who tried to intercept him and thereby deliver Sitā from his clutches. Now tormented with grief to perceive the vulture mortally wounded and to hear from it of Sitā (the princess of Mithilā, the capital of King Janaka) having been forcibly carried away by Rāvana, Śri Rama (a scion of Raghu) loudly wailed, his mind agitated through perturbation. Then, having cremated the vulture Jatāyu and hunting up Sitā in the forest in that very state of grief, Śri Rama came across an ogre, Kabandha by name, who was deformed of body and terrible to look at : so the tradition goes. (47-55)

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

तं निद्रत्य महाबाहुदैदाह स्वर्गतिश्र स:।

स चाय्य कथयामास शबर्ं धर्मचारिणीम्।। 56 ॥

श्रमपां धर्मनिरुपामारिभागछेति राषव।

सोउभ्यगच्छमहातंजन: शबर्ं शत्रुसूदन:॥ 57 ॥

"Having made short work of him, the mighty-armed prince cremated him too and the demon regained his original form of a Gandharva and ascended to heaven. Nay, while rising to heaven he said to Śri Rāma, 'Seek, O Rāma (a scion of Raghu), Śabari, a pious hermitess, who is well-versed in the principles of righteousness.' The highly glorious Rāma, the destroyer of his foes, accordingly approached Śabari.

(56-57)

शवर्यां पूजितः सम्यम् रामो दुशरथात्मजः।

प्यन्तीते हनुमता सङ्गते वानरेण ह १। 58 ।।

“Duly worshipped by Sabari, Śri Rāma, son of Dáśaratha, came into contact with the monkey chief, Hanumān, on the bank of the Pampā lake : so the tradition goes.(58)

हनुमद्वचान्यैव सुगीयेण समापातः।

सुगीवाय च तत्सर्व शंसद्रामो महावल: ॥ 59  ॥

आदितस्तद् यथा वृनं सीतायाश्र विशेषतः ।

सुगीवश्रापि तत्सर्व श्रुला रामस्य वाना: ॥ 60  ॥

चकार सख्यं रामेण प्रीतश्रीवानिर्मात्रिकम् ।

ततो वानरारजेन वैरानुकधनं प्रति ॥ 61  ॥

रामायाविदंतं सर्वे प्रणयाद् दुःस्त्रिजेन च।

प्रतिज्ञां च रामेण तदा वालिवधं प्रति ॥ 62  ॥

"At the intercession of Hanumān specifically, he further made friends with Sugriva. Nay, to Sugriva the exceedingly powerful Rāma duly narrated from the very beginning (his very birth) the whole of his popular story and the well-known story of Sītā, his consort, in particular. Pleased to hear the whole narrative of Śrī Rāma, the monkey chief, Sugriva, too made friendship with Śrī Rāma in the presence of the sacred fire as a witness*. Nay, in response to an inquiry made by Śrī Rāma with regard to his

enmity with his own elder brother, Vāli, the whole incident was then related by Sugriva, the ruler of the monkeys, afflicted as he was, to Śrī Rāma and lovingly by made an alliance with him based on mutual trust. A vow was taken by Śrī Rāma that very moment to the effect that Vāli would be killed by him. (59-62)

वालिनक्षु बल तन कथयामास वानर:।

सुग्रीवः शक्तिशासीवित्यं वीयेंण रायचे ॥ 63  ॥

"And, there on Mount Rsyamūka the monkey chief described to Śrī Rāma the unique strength of Vālī, his elder brother, since Sugrīva was full of misgivings concerning Śrī Rāma (a scion of Raghu) in the matter of prowess vis-a-vis his opponent, Vālī. (63)

राघवप्रत्यार्थं तु दुद्धभे: कायमुत्तमम्।

दर्शन्यामास सुगीयो महापर्वतसर्पिभम् ॥ 64  ॥

"In order to make Śrī Rāma aware of Vālī's strength, Sugriva actually showed to him the exceptionally tall skeleton of the demon, Dundubhi, killed by Vālī, which looked like a big mountain and which had been disdainfully kicked away to a long distance by Vālī. (64)

उत्स्मयिता महाबाहु: प्रेक्ष्य चास्थि महाबाल: ।

पादाङुकुटेन चिक्षेप सम्पूर्णं दर्शयोजनम् ॥ ६.५ ॥

“Smiling at this and gazing on the skeleton, the mighty-armed Śī Rāma, who possessed extraordinary strength, hurled it with his toe to a distance of full eighty miles. (65)

विषयेद च पुनस्तालान् सैकेन महेशुणा ।

मिरि रसातलं चैव जनयन् प्रत्ययं तदा ॥ 66  ॥

“Nay, in order to inspire confidence in the mind of Sugriva, Śrī Rāma further pierced on that very occasion with a single mighty shaft one after another as many as seven palmyra trees standing in a line adjacent to one another, a hillock standing by as well as Rasātala (the sixth subterranean

* It has been customary among the Hindus to contract friendships—more especially matrimonial alliances—in the presence of the sacred fire as a witness with a view to solemnizing them.

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

plane including the five preceding ones viz., Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talāatala and Mahātalala). (66)

ततः प्रीतमान्तेन विश्वस्तः स महाकपि:।

किंक्किश्वां राससहितो जगमा च गृहां तदा ॥ 67  ॥

"Reassured by the latter feat and accompanied by Śrī Rāma, that great monkey, Sugriva, then marched at once with a mind full of delight to Kiśkindhā (the capital of Vāli), situated cave-like in the midst of mountains. (67)

ततो3गर्नेब्द्रिवरः सुगीवे हेमपिछ्लः।

तेन नाटेन महता निजगाम हरीक्ष्र: ॥ 68  ॥

"Then roared Sugriva, the monkey chief, who was tawny as gold in appearance. Distracted by that great unusual roar, Vāli, the king of the monkeys, sallied forth to meet Sugriva. (68)

अनुभान्य तदा तारां सुगीवेण समापातः ।

निज्ञान च तर्चे श्रेणेकेन राषव: ॥ 69  ॥

"Reassuring Tarā, his devoted and sagacious wife, who discouraged him by pleading that Sugriva had since secured the alliance of Śri Rāma and as such could no longer be conquered, he then closed with Sugriva and in the course of that very encounter Śri Rāma (the celebrated scion of Raghu) disposed of Vāli with a single arrow. (69)

ततः सुप्रीववचनाढूला वालिनमाहे।

सुप्रीवेव ने तद्राज्ये राधव: प्रत्यपादयत् ॥ 50  ॥

"Having thus killed Vāli on the field of battle at the instance of Sugriva, Śri Rāma (a scion of Raghu) then installed Sugriva himself on Vāli's throne. (70)

स च सर्वान् समानीय वानरान् वानरर्षभः।

दिश्र: प्रस्थाययामास दिद्धुर्जनकामजाम ॥ 19  ॥

"Bringing together all the monkeys, the said Sugriva, the jewel among the monkeys, too despatched them in all directions, keen as he was to have Sitā (the daughter of Janaka) traced out. (71)

ततो गृधस्य वचनात् सम्यातेहनुभान् बली।

ग्रतयोजनविस्तीर्ण पुलुवे लवाणणंवम् ॥ 92  ॥

"Then, according to the counsel of Sampāti, the vulture king, who could see Sita in Lanka from that distance, the mighty Hanumān leapt across the brackish sea, eight hundred miles broad, that parted the mainland of India from Lanka. (72)

तत्र लढ़ुं समासाघ घुर्गे रावणपालिताम्।

ददर्श सीतां ध्यान्तीमशोकविनको गताम् ॥ 93  ॥

“Duly reaching the city of Lanka, ruled over by the demon king, Rāvana, he found there Sitā confined in a grove of Aśoka trees, contemplating on the feet of Śri Rāma. (73)

निवेदयित्वाधिभूजनं प्रवृत्ति विनिवेद्य च ।

समाधास्य च वैदेहीं मदैयामास तोरणम् ॥ 41  ॥

“Presenting to her the souvenir in the shape of a signet-ring handed over to him by Śri Rāma and relating the news about Śri Rāma’s alliance with Sugriva and the latter’s installation on the throne of Kiśkindhā after Vāli, his elder brother and mortal enemy, had been got rid of by Śri Rāma and having consoled Sītā, the daughter of King Janaka, with the assurance that her consort would shortly come and rescue her after disposing of the tyrannical Rāvana, Hanumān demolished the outer gate of the orchard.

(74)

पड़ सेनाग्रभान् हत्वा सस मन्थिसुतानपि ।

शूरमक्षं च निधिष्ण्य ग्रहणं समुपगामत् ॥ 95  ॥

“Having made short work of five army-commanders (Pingalanetra and others) as also seven sons of ministers (Jambumāli and so on), and crushed the gallant Akṣa (a son of Rāvana), he allowed himself to be bound under the spell of a Brahmāstra or missile presided over by Brahmā, the creator, and discharged by Rāvana’s heir-apparent, Meghanāda. (75)

अस्वेणोमुक्रमायानं जाला पैतामहाद्व सरात्।

मर्थयन् राक्षसान् वीरो यन्धिणसतान् यदूच्छया ॥ 16  ॥



“Though knowing himself as released by the aforesaid missile in consequence of a boon granted by Brahmā to the effect that after undergoing bondage for about a couple of hours, the missile associated with his name being infallible, he would be rid of it, the hero, Hanumān, who was keen to meet Ravana, deliberately bore with those ogres who carried him in bondage to Rāvana. (76)

ततो दर्ध्या पूर्णी लढ़ापूते सीतां च मेथिलतीम्।

रामाय प्रियमाख्यानु पुनरायान्महाकपि: ॥ 171  ॥

"Having set on fire the city of Lanka barring the abode of Sitā, the princess of Mithilā, alone, the great monkey Hanumān, then came back by the same route to Kiśkindhā to break the delightful news, of Sitā having been found, to Śri Rama. (77)

सोर्पिभ्यम्य महात्मानं कृत्वा रामं प्रदक्षिणम्।

न्येवेदवदमेवातमा दृष्टा सीतित तत्त्वः ॥ 98  ॥

"Approaching the high-souled Śri Rāma and going round him clockwise as a mark of respect, Hanumān, who was possessed of infinite intelligence, submitted to him that Sītā had been seen by him in reality. (78)

ततः सुप्रीवसहितो गला तीरं महोदधेः ।

समूत्रे क्षोभयामास शैरपादित्यसंनिभः ॥ 19  ॥ ॥

"Moving to the shore of the Indian ocean in the extreme south, accompanied by Sugriva, Śri Rama then shook the ocean to its lowest depths (in Patāla, the nethermost subterranean plane) by his arrows glorious as the sun (on the latter not responding to allow passage to the army of monkeys, that sought to march across it in order to reach Lanka in their bid to recover Sitā). (79)

दर्शयामास चात्मानं समुद्रः सरितां पति:।

समुद्रवचनाच्येव नलं सेतुमकारयत्॥ 80  ॥

"At this, Ocean, the lord of the rivers, not only revealed himself in person to Śri Rāma but also apologized to him for his refractoriness and only at the intercession of Ocean, Śri Rāma caused Nala to build a bridge across the sea. (80)

तेन गत्वा पूरीं लड़ीं हत्वा रावणमाह्वे ।

राम: सीतामनुप्राय परं ब्रौडामुपागमत् ॥ 8 9  ॥

"Reaching the city of Lanka by the bridge and killing Rávana in a combat, Śri Rāma experienced a sense of great shame on getting back Sita (who had remained so long at the grove of a demon in Lanka and could be easily pronounced by critics as polluted). (81)

तामुचा ततो राम: फरर्ष जनसंसदि ।

अम्प्रध्यागा सा सीता विवेश ज्वलनं सती ॥ 82  ॥

“Śrī Rama then spoke harsh words to her in the assembly of monkeys and others. Resenting them, the aforesaid Sitā, chaste as she was, entered fire. (82)

ततोप्रनिवचनात् सीतां ज्ञाला विगताकल्याण्।

कर्मिणा तेन महता शैलोक्यं सचराचरम् ॥ 83  ॥

सद्वर्षिणां तुटं राघवस्य महात्मनः ।

बभौं रामः सम्यहूषः पूर्णितः सर्वदैवलेः ॥ 84  ॥

"Coming to know Sītā as sinless from the words of the fire-god, who testified to her chastity, Śri Rāma thereupon accepted her. All the three worlds, comprising the animate and inanimate creation, alongwith the hosts of gods and Rsis were pleased with that remarkable feat of the high-souled Rāma in the shape of the overthrow of Rāvana and the deliverance of Sītā. Honoured by all the gods, Śri Rāma thereupon looked extremely delighted. (83-84)

अधिषिच्च च लज्ञायां राक्षसेन्रं विभीषणम्।

कृतकृत्यसदा रामो विज्ञः प्रमुमोद ह३। 5 ।।

“Nay, having installed Vibhisāna, the chief of the ogres, on the throne of Lanka, Śri Rāma felt accomplished of purpose and, rid of anxiety, greatly rejoiced: so the tradition goes. (85)

देवताओं वरे प्राय समुस्थाय च वानगान्।

अयोध्यां प्रस्थितो राम: पुष्यकैण सुहद्वृतः ॥ 6  ॥

"Having received a boon to the effect that all the combatants that had fought on the side of Śri Rāma and fallen in battle be restored to life, from the gods, who came in

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

their aerial cars to felicitate Sî Râma on his victory, that had brought solace to all the three worlds and aroused as though from sleep, the monkeys fallen in battle, Sî Râma flew to Ayodhyâ in the aerial car known by the name of ‘Puspaka’ that had been snatched by Râvana from his half-brother, Kubera, the god of riches, accompanied by his relations, Sîta and Laksmana and friends, Vibhişana, Sugriva and others. (86)

भरूजाश्रमं गला राम: सत्यपराकमः।

भरतस्यात्रिके रामो हनूमन्तं व्यसर्जयन्ते॥ 87  ॥

"Reaching the hermitage of the sage Bharadwāja in the vicinity of Prayāga, Śrī Rāma of unfailing prowess despatched Hanūmān in advance to the presence of Bharata in order to apprise him of his safe return lest he should be taken unawares. (87)

पुनराख्यायिकां जलव्न् सुग्रीवसहितस्तदा।

पुष्पकं तत् समाकृष्ठा नन्दिगामं ययौ तदा ॥ 88  ॥

"Narrating past history (the circumstances that had led to his exile in the forest) and boarding the celebrated Puspaka once more, he then flew to Nandigrâma (then a part of Ayodhyâ), accompanied by Sugriva and others. (88)

नन्दिगामे जरं हिला भातृभि: सहितोउनच: ।

राम: सीतामनुप्राय रान्यं पुनरावासवान् ॥ 89  ॥

"Having disentangled his matted hair at Nandigrāma alongwith his three brothers and back with Sitā, the sinless Rāma regained his kingdom too. (89)

प्रहल्पृदितो लोकसृष्टः पृष्टः सुधार्मिकः ।

निरामयो ह्रोगेश्र दुरुभिश्रभयवर्जितः ॥ 10  ॥

“During the reign of Śri Rāma people will be positively much delighted and cheerful, contented and well-fed, exceedingly pious, free from mental agony and bodily ailments and rid of the scourge of famine and fear of theft etc. (90)

न पुत्रमरणं केविर्द्व श्व्यस्ति पुरुषा: क्वविर्च।

नार्येश्राविधा नित्यं भविष्यन्ति पतित्रता: ॥ 91  ॥

"Nowhere will men witness the death of their son or daughter, women will never be widows and will be ever devoted to their husband. (91)

न चारिनजं भयं विक्तिबामु मजन्ति जन्तवः ।

न वातजं भयं विक्तिबापि ज्यरुक्तं तथा ॥ 12  ॥

"There will be no fear from fire nor will living beings be drowned in water. There will be no fear from wind nor any fear of fever. (92)

न चापि शूद्धयं तत्र न तस्करभयं तथा।

नगराणि च राष्ट्रीणि धनधान्यतुनानि च ॥ 13  ॥

“Nor will there be fear of starvation in his kingdom nor that of thieves. Nay, cities and states will be full of riches and food-grains. (93)

नित्य प्रमूदिता: सर्वे यथा कृतयुगे तथा।

अथमेधशतौरिष्टा तथा बहुसुवर्षकैः ॥ 14  ॥

गवां कोट्ययुतं दत्त्वा विद्धद्रज्यो विधिपूर्वकम्।

असंख्येयं धर्न तत्त्वा ब्राहुणेभ्यो महायशगाः ॥ 15  ॥

राजवंशाङ्ठतगुणान् स्थापियथ्यित राघवः ।

चातुपर्यंच च लोकेप्रसिन् रसे खे धर्मे नियोक्षिति ॥ 96  ॥

"All will be ever extremely happy as in Satyayuga. Having propitiated the Lord through hundreds of horse-sacrifices and other sacrifices involving the use of abundant gold, nay, bestowed with due ceremony a billion cows on the learned and giving away untold riches to the Brāhmanas, the highly renowned Rāma will establish royal dynasties, a hundred times more prosperous than before, by not only recognizing and confirming their sovereignty but even by liberally subsidizing them. Nay, he will direct the people belonging to all the four grades of society to follow their respective duties on this terrestrial plane. (94-96)

दशबर्षसहस्राणि दशबर्षशतानि च।

रामो राज्यमुपासिता ब्रह्मलोक प्रयास्यति ॥ 11  ॥

"Having served his kingdom for eleven thousand years, Śri Rāma will ascend to Brahamloka (the highest heaven)." (97)



इरं पर्वितं पापचं पुण्यं वेदेढ्रु सम्मितम्।

यः पेटद्र रामचरितं सर्वपार्य: प्रमुच्यते ॥ 18  ॥

He who reads this sacred narrative of Śri Rāma, which is capable of purifying the mind and wiping out sins and is treated on a par with the Vedas, is completely absolved from all sins. (98)

एतदाख्यानायुध्धे पठन् रामायणं नर:।

सपुर्योगै: सगण: प्रेल्य स्वरों महीयते ॥ 19  ॥

Reading this narrative centring round Śri Rāma and conducive to longevity, a

इत्यार्थ़ श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाग़ंडे प्रथम: सर्ग: ॥ 1  ॥

Thus ends Canto One in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

द्वितीय: सर्ग:

Canto II

Brahmā's visit

नारदस्य तु तद् वाक्यं श्रुला वाक्यविशाराद:।

पूजयामास धर्मत्या सहाशिष्यो महामुनि. १ १ ॥

Hearing the aforesaid discourse of Nārada, the pious sage Vālmiki, a past master in expression, worshipped the most prominent sage Nārada with his own pupils. (1)

यथावत् पूजितसेने देवर्षिनरदस्तथा।

आपृच्छ्यैवाभ्यन्त्रात: स जगाम विहायसम् ॥ 2  ॥

Duly worshipped and permitted by him on asking leave, the aforesaid celestial seer, Nārada, forthwith rose to his abode in the heavens. (2)

स मुहूर्ते गते तस्मिन् देवलोकं मुनिस्तदा।

जगाम तमसातीरं जाह्व्यात्स्विवदूरत: ॥ 3  ॥

Having tarried in his hermitage awhile (lit., for less than an hour) on the seer having left for heaven, the sage then repaired to the bank of the Tamasā, not very far from the holy Gaṅgā (obviously for his midday bath and devotions). (3)

man shall, on departing from this world, be honoured in heaven along with his sons and grandsons as well as his followers and attendants. (99)

पदन् द्विजो वागृषभवमीयात् स्यात् क्रियोः भूमिपतिलमयोत्।

वर्णिजनः पण्यकललयीयाजान्छ शुह्रोप्रि महत्वमीयात् || १०० ॥

Reading it a Brahmana bids fair to attain eminence in eloquence; if he is a Kṣatriya, he is sure to attain lordship over the earth; a man belonging to the mercantile community is sure to secure profit in trade and a man belonging to the Sūdra class can hope to attain superiority. (100)

इत्यार्थ श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकागडे प्रथम: सर्ग: ॥ 1  ॥

Thus ends Canto One in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

द्वितीय: सर्ग:

Canto II

Brahmā's visit

नारदस्य तु तद् वाक्यं श्रुला वाक्यविशाराद:।

पूजयामास धर्मत्या सहाशिष्यो महामुभिन् ॥ 1  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid discourse of Nārada, the pious sage Vālmiki, a past master in expression, worshipped the most prominent sage Nārada with his own pupils. (1)

यथावत् पूजितसेने देवर्विनरिदस्तथा।

आपृच्छ्यैवाभ्यन्त्रात: स जगाम विहायसम् ॥ 2  ॥

Duly worshipped and permitted by him on asking leave, the aforesaid celestial seer, Nārada, forthwith rose to his abode in the heavens. (2)

स मुहूर्ते गते तस्मिन् देवलोकं मुनिसन्तदा।

जगाम तमसातीरं जाह्व्यात्स्वविदूरतः ॥ 3  ॥

Having tarried in his hermitage awhile (lit., for less than an hour) on the seer having left for heaven, the sage then repaired to the bank of the Tamasā, not very far from the holy Gaṅgā (obviously for his midday bath and devotions). (3)

स तु तौरं समासाछ तमसाया मुनिस्तदा।

शिष्यमाह स्थितं पार्शवे दृष्टा तीर्थेमकर्दमम् ॥ 4  ॥

Duly reaching the bank of the Tamasā and finding the descent to the river free from mud, the sage then spoke to his pupil standing by his side as follows: (4)

अकर्दमिमदं तीर्थं भरूद्राज निशगमय।

रमणीयं प्रसजाम्बु समन्तुष्यमनो यथा ॥ 5  ॥

"Look at this descent, O Bharadwāja, which is free from mud and pleasant, its water being transparent as the mind of a righteous man. (5)

न्यस्यतां कलशस्तात दीयतां वल्कलं मम।

इदमेवावगाहिष्टे तमसातीध्मुतमम् ॥ 6  ॥

"Let your pitcher be laid on the bank, O dear one! and the bark be handed over to me for being wrapped about my loins when I have bathed. I shall take my dip at this very descent of the Tamasā, excellent as it is." (6)



एवमुक्तो भरद्वाजो वाल्यीकेन महात्मना।

प्रायच्छत मुनेस्तस्य वल्कलं नियतो गुरो: ॥ 7  ॥

Enjoined thus by the high-souled Välmiki, Bharadwāja handed over the bark to the aforesaid sage, devoted as he was to his teacher. (7)

स शिष्यहस्तादादाय वल्कलं नियतैन्रस्य:।

विचचार ह प्रश्यस्तत् सवेती वियुलं वनम् ॥ 8  ॥

Taking the bark from the hand of his pupil, the sage, who had fully controlled his senses and as such had no inclination to see anything delightful to the senses, sauntered about, they say, surveying the extensive forest on all sides. (8)

तस्याधशो तु मिथूनं चरन्तमनपायिनम्।

ददर्शे भगवांतत्र क्रीडायोश्राकनि:स्वनम् ॥ 9  ॥

Close to that descent the glorious sage actually perceived in that forest a pair of cranes moving about, never parting from one another and making a charming sound. (9)

तस्मात् तु मिथुनाटेकं पुमासं पापनिश्रधः। जघान वैरनिलयो निषादस्तस्य पश्यतः ॥ 10  ॥

A Niṣāda (a member of a wild tribe living on hunting) of sinful resolve and full of animosity even towards innocent creatures, struck with an arrow one of the said pair, the male bird, even while the sage looked on. (10)

तं श्रोणितपरीताङ्गे चेष्टमानं महीतले।

भायां तु निहतं दूधा कराव करणां गिरम।। 19 ।।

वियुक्ता पतिना तेन द्विजेन सहचारिणा।

तामशरीषण मतेन पतिणा सहितेन वै।। 19 ।।

Seeing it mortally wounded and tossing about on the ground with its limbs smeared all over with blood, the female bird naturally gave out a piteous wail, parted as she was from her mate and companion, the aforesaid bird, that was endowed with a coppery crest, was inflamed with passion, nay, sexually united with her and as such had distended its wings. (11-12)

तथाविधं द्विजं द्वुधा निषादेन निपातितम् ।

त्रशेषंधर्मातनस्तस्य काकणयं समपढत । 13  ॥

On seeing the bird struck down by the fowler in that state of copulation, pity was aroused in the heart of that pious seer. (13)

ततः कर्णवैद्वाद्धभोंउपमिति द्विजः।

निशाय्य रुदर्ती क्रीओझीमदं वचनमब्रवीत्। 14  ॥

Further seized with compassion to behold the shrieking female bird and considering the fowler's act to be sinful, the sage addressed the following words to the hunter: (14)

मा निषाद प्रतिष्ठां ल्यममः शाश्रतीः समाः।

यत् क्रीओघिष्यात्रकमवधीः काममोहितम् ॥ 15  ॥

"May you not have peace of mind for endless years, O fowler, since you have killed one of the pair of cranes infatuated with passion." (15)

तस्येयं बूवतश्रिता बभूव हृदि वीक्षतः।

शोकातैनास्य शकुनैः किमिदं व्याहृतं मया ॥ 16  ॥

Even as he spoke in this strain, and then reflected: "What is it that has been uttered by me, tormented as I was with grief for this bird", uneasiness appeared in his heart. (16)

चित्तवन् स महाप्राजश्रकार मतिमान् मतिम्।

शिष्यं चैवाब्बवीद् वाक्यमिदं स मुनिनुपुत्रः ॥ 1 1  ॥

Brooding awhile, the sage, who was highly learned and full of wisdom, made up his mind and the said chief of the sages addressed the following words to his pupil, Bharadwajā : (17)

पादवब्द्रोडप्रसमस्त-नीतयसमिति: । शोकातत्थ प्रवृत्तो मे श्लोको भवत् नान्था ॥ 18  ॥

"Let this utterance made by me while I was stricken with grief, nay, set in four metrical feet, each containing an equal number of letters (viz., eight) and possessing the rhythm of a song that can be sung to a lute, be accepted as real poetry and not otherwise." (18)



शिष्यस्तु तस्य बूवतो मुनेर्वीक्यमनुतनाम्।

प्रतिजग्राह संतुष्टस्तस्य तुष्टोउभवमनुः ॥ 19  ॥

Even as the aforesaid sage uttered the couplet, unexcelled as it was (in that it was suggestive of the entire theme of the Rāmāyana), his pupil, highly delighted, actually committed it to memory. The sage thereupon felt much pleased with him. (19)

सोप्रभेकं ततः कृत्वा तीर्थे तत्मन् यथाविधि।

तमेव चिन्तयवर्धेमुपावतैत वै मुनि: ॥ 20  ॥

Having finished his midday ablution with due ceremony in that descent of the holy Tamasā, the sage then returned to his hermitage, brooding over the same incident, as a matter of fact. (20)

भरद्राजस्ततः शिष्यो विनीतः श्रुतवान् गुरोः ।

कलर्श प्रूर्णमादाय पृष्ठतोउनुजागम हा ॥ 21  ॥

Taking the pitcher filled with water, his submissive and learned pupil, Bharadwaja, too, they say, thereupon followed in the wake of his teacher. (21)

स प्रविश्याभ्रमदं शिष्येण सह धर्मवित्।

उपविष्य: कक्षाश्रान्यश्रकार व्यानमास्थित: ॥ 22  ॥

Reaching the grounds of the hermitage alongwith his pupil, the sage, who knew what is right, sat down and talked on various other topics, while remaining absorbed in contemplation of the couplet uttered by him. (22)

आजगमा ततो ब्रह्मा लोककर्ता स्वयं प्रभुः ।

चतुर्मुंजी महातेजा उर्दुं तं मुनिपुब्बम् ॥ 23  ॥

Then appeared the almighty Brahma, the four-faced creator of the fourteen worlds, who was possessed of great splendour, personally to see Valmiki, the chief of hermits. (23)

वाल्मीक्रिय तं दृष्टा सहसोध्याय वाययतः ।

प्राझिल: प्रयतो भूत्वा तस्थी परमविधिस्मतः ॥ 24  ॥

Greatly astonished to see him, Valmiki forthwith rose in haste from his seat and

stood tongue-tied with folded hands in great humility. (24)

पूजयामास तं देवे पाछाध्यासनवन्दरे: ।

प्रणम्य विधिधच्चें पूधा चैव निरामयम् ॥ 25  ॥

Bowing low to him according to the scriptural ordinance and inquiring after his welfare too, the sage worshipped the aforesaid deity by offering water to wash his feet and hands with, as well as a glorious seat and bestowed encomiums on him. (25)

अधोपविष्य  भगवानासे  परमाधिति ।

वाल्मीकये च  ऋषये  संदिदेशासनं  ततः ॥ 26  ॥

Making himself comfortable on the most exalted seat offered by Vālmiki, the almighty creator, who was covered all over by his own effulgence, forthwith directed the sage Vālmiki to take his seat. (26)

ब्रहाणा समनुजातः सोउप्यापाविशदासने ।

उपविष्टे तदा तस्मिन् साक्षाल्लोकपितामहे ॥ 27  ॥

तद्धतेनेव मनसा वाल्मीकिछ्यांनमार्थितः ।

पायात्मना कृतं कष्टं वैर्यहणबृद्धिना ॥ 28  ॥

यत् तादूर्षो चारुरवं क्रीछं हन्यादकरणात् ।

शोच्चेन वपुनः क्रोड्रीमुपश्लोकामिं जगौ ॥ 29  ॥

पुत्रन्तर्गतमान भृत्वा शोकपरायणः ।

तमुवाच तते ब्रह्मा प्रहस्त् मुनिपुङ्ज्वम् ॥ 30  ॥

Duly permitted by Brahma, Vālmiki too made himself comfortable on his seat. Even though Brahma, the progenitor of the entire creation, was directly seated before him at that time, Vālmiki remained absorbed in reverie with his mind fixed on that very incident. He said to himself: "A grave wrong was perpetrated by the wicked fowler, who was bent upon catching the bird with malicious intent, in that he struck down without any fault the crane in that state, cooing so delightfully!" Even while bewailing the lot of the female crane, disunited from its mate, he repeated the same couplet in the presence of Brahmā and, pondering over the meaning of the verse, fell a prey to



grief once more at the thought of his having unconsciously subjected the fowler to a curse and thereby depleted the stock of his askesis. Brahma then laughingly said to Valmiki, the chief of the hermits: (27-30)

श्लोक एवास्त्वयं बढ़ो नात्र कार्यां विचारणा।

मच्छन्दिवे ते बढ़ान प्रवृत्तेये सरस्ती ॥ 31  ॥

"Let this metrical composition be conducive to your glory. You need not brood over this any more. Through my will alone has this speech flowed from your lips, O Brāhmaṇa sage! (31)

रामस्य चरितं कृतकं कुरु त्वमृषिसन्त। प्रधान्चो भगवतो लोके रामस्य धीमत: ॥ 32  ॥

"Describe, O jewel among seers, the whole life on this earth of Lord Śri Rāma, whose mind is ever given to piety and who is full of wisdom. (32)

वृतं कथय धीरस्य यथा ते नारदाच्छुतम्।

रहस्यं च प्रकाशं च यद् वृतं तस्य धीमतः ॥ 33  ॥

रामस्य सहसौमित्रे राक्षसानां च सर्वश:।

वैदेहाग्रेशि यद् वृतं प्रकाशं यदि वा रहः ॥ 34  ॥

तचाप्यविविदितं सर्वे विदितं ते भविष्यति।

न ते वागनृता काव्ये काचिचर्र भविष्यति ॥ 35  ॥

"Tell the story of that hero as heard by you from the lips of Nàrada. Whatever account, known or unknown, there is of the all-wise Śri Rāma, as well as of Lakṣmana, the son of Sumitrā, nay, of all the Rāksasas, who fought with and were killed by him and whatever account, known or unknown, there is of Sitā (the foster-daughter of Janaka), all that will be revealed to you even though unknown at present. No description of yours in this poem that will be composed by you will prove false.

(33-35)

कुरु रामकक्षा पुण्यां रुलोकबढ़ां मनोरामम्।

यावत् स्थास्यन्ति गिराय: सरितघ्र महीतले ॥ 36  ॥।

तावत् रामायणकक्षा लोकेषु प्रविरिष्यति।

यावत् रामस्य च कक्षा तलकृता प्रविरिष्यति ॥ 37  ॥।

तावद्धवैमधघ्र छ तं मल्लोकेषु निवतस्यसि ।

इत्युक्ता भगवान् बझ्ञा तरैवान्तरधीयत ।

ततः सशिष्यो भगवान् मुनिविस्यमयाययी ॥ 38  ॥

"Render the sacred and soul-ravishing story of Śrī Rāma into similar verses. The theme of the Rāmāyama will continue to be popular in all the three worlds so long as mountains and rivers will remain on the surface of the earth. And you will abide both higher up in the heavenly regions and below on earth, according to your choice, in the worlds of my creation so long as the narrative of Śrī Rāma composed by you will remain current." Saying so, the almighty Brahmā went out of sight on the very spot. Thereupon the glorious sage, Valmiki, was filled with wonder alongwith his pupils, Bharadwāja and others. (36-38)

तस्य शिष्यास्ततः सर्वे जगु: श्लोकामिमं पुनः।

मुहुभुं: प्रीयमाणा: प्राहुश भुशाविस्मतः ॥ 39  ॥

Then all his pupils repeated the aforesaid verse uttered by their teacher and, getting delighted again and again, spoke to one another as follows, greatly astonished at the honour conferred on their teacher by the creator himself by calling on him of his own accord: (39)

साम्बर्शेश्तुर्भिभवः पादैर्गीता महर्शिपण।

सो3नुव्याहरणाद भूय: शोक: श्लोकत्वमागतः ॥ 40  ॥

"What was uttered by the great sage, Vālmiki, in four feet consisting of an equal number of syllables was nothing but his grief converted into a verse because of its being voiced by him." (40)

तस्य बुद्धिरियं जाता महर्षेभवितात्मनः ।

कृत्वं रामायणं काव्यमीदुर्गे: करवाण्यम् ॥ 41  ॥

The thought occurred to the great sage of purified mind that he should compose the entire poem of the Rāmāyaṇa in such verse (similar to the one already uttered by him out of grief). (41)

उदारवृत्तायिद्वैर्मनोरमेतदाय राम्य चकार कांतिंमान।

समाधीः रंकोकाशैर्यशिरिवो यशकारं काव्यमुदारर्णिः । 42  ॥



The illustrious sage, endowed as he was with a catholic outlook, then composed in hundreds and thousands of soul-vraising verses with their feet comprising an even number of syllables and consisting of words depicting the noble deeds of the glorious Śri Rama, a poem which has brought great renown to him. (42)

तदुपगततमाससर्पिधियों सममधुरोपनतार्थवावस्यबद्धम्।

स्युवरचितं मुनिप्राणितं दशणिसरमघु वधं निशामयवम्यम् ॥ 43  ॥

डूल्याँ श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे द्वितीय: सर्ग: ॥ 2  ॥

Thus ends Canto Two in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

तृतीय: सर्ग:

Canto III

A brief outline of the Rāmāyaṇa as given by the poet himself

श्रृता वस्तु समग्रं तद् धर्मार्थसहितं हितम्।

व्यक्तमन्वेषते भूयो यद् वृत्तं तस्य धीमतः ॥ 1  ॥

Having heard from Nārada, as aforesaid, the entire theme of the poem to be composed by him, promising religious merit and worldly prosperity to its readers and hearers and conferring supreme benefit in the shape of final beatitude, Vālmiki sought to discover directly through intuition a detailed life-account of that sagacious prince. (1)

उपस्यूयोदकं सम्यडूमृनि: स्थल्या कृताङ्जलि: । प्राचीनाग्रेषु दर्भेषु धर्मेणान्वेते गतिम्।। 2  ॥

Sipping water as a purificatory rite, according to the scriptural ordinance, and taking his seat with folded hands on the blades of Kuśa grass with their ends pointing to the east, the sage sought to discover the exploits of Śrī Rāma through yogic power conferred on him by Brahmā. (2)

रामलक्ष्मणसीताभी राजा दूराशंथन च। सभार्यैन सराष्ट्रण यत् प्रासं तत्र तत्त्वतः ॥ 3  ॥ हसितं भाषितं चैव गतियांवच्च चेथित्म। तत् सर्वे भार्वीयैण यथावत् सम्पर्षरति ॥ 4  ॥

By dint of that yogic power he was able to perceive directly and clearly in reality every detail in that state of absorption all that pertained to Śrī Rāma, Laksmana and Sītā as well as to Emperor Dásaratha, alongwith his wives and kingdom—how they laughed and talked and moved and whatever they did. (3-4)

स्वीतृतीयेन च तथा यत् प्रापं चरता वने।

स्वत्संधेन रामेण तत् सर्वे चाचवेक्षते ॥ 5  ॥

Likewise, he further directly perceived in order of sequence all that was enacted by Śrī Rāma, while roaming about in the forests in the company of Laksmaṇa and Sitaś (his spouse), true to his promise. (5)

ततः पश्यति धर्मात्मा तत् सर्वे योगमार्थितः ।

पुरा यत् तत्र निर्वर्तं पाणावामलकं यथा ॥ 6  ॥

Absorbed in deep meditation, that pious sage thereby saw, as clearly as one would see a myrobalan placed in one's palm, all that had happened in the past in relation to Śrī Rāma, Lakṣmana and Sītā as well as that which still awaited them. (6)



तत् सर्वे तत्त्वो दुष्टा धर्मेण स महामिति: । अधिरासम्य रामस्य तत् सर्वे कर्तुभुक्त: ॥ 9  ॥

Having seen all that in reality by dint of yogic power, Välmiki, who was possessed of great wisdom, girded up his loins to render into verse the whole story of Śri Rāma, the delighter of all. (7)

कामार्थीग्रामेयुक्ते धर्माध्रीगुणविस्तरम्।

समूर्यिव रन्ताऊं सर्वश्रुत्तिमनोहरम्। 88 ॥

स यथा कथितं पूर्व नारदेन महात्मना।

रयुवंशस्य चरितं चकार भगवान् मुनिनः॥ 9 ॥

The glorious sage Valmiki composed in verse, as it was told earlier by the high-souled Nārada, the story of Śri Rāma (descended in the line of Raghu) which discusses in a secondary way the subjects of Kāma, i.e., sense-enjoyment, and worldly prosperity and expatiates on the merits of the two other objects of human pursuit, viz., piety and final beatitude, and thus full of jewels like the ocean, attracts the ears as well as the mind of all by the musical ring of its verses and the profundity of their meaning, respectively. (8-9)

जन्म रामस्य सुमहद् वीर्यं सर्वानुकूलतात्।

लोकस्य प्रियतां क्षान्ति सीम्यतां सत्यशीलतां || १० ॥

The advent of Śri Rāma, his superlative prowess, benevolence to all, universal popularity, forgiveness, amiability and the habit of speaking the truth; (10)

नाना चित्रा: कथाश्राना विश्वामिसराधारयेन।

जानव्याश्र विवाहे च धनुषश्र विभोदनम् ॥ 11  ॥

many other wondrous episodes, e.g., the one relating to the descent of the holy Garnga, told by Viswámitra in the course of his journey with the sage Viswámitra first to the latter's hermitage and then to Mithilā in order to attend the selection of a husband by the princess of Mithilā in an assembly of suitors; his breaking the bow (kept by the king of Mithilā in an arena in order to test the suitors' prowess), and the wedding of

Sitā (Janaka's daughter) and others (Urmilā and so on); (11)

यमारमविवादं च गुणान द्वागरथेस्तथा।

तथाधिषेकं राम्ये कैकेच्या दुष्टभावताम्। 11 ।।

the vexed dialogue between Śri Rāma and Paraśurāma over the breaking of the bow; a description of the extraordinary virtues of Śri Rāma, son of Dáśaratha; preparations for Śri Rāma's installation as the regent of Ayodhyā and the treachery of Kaikeyi; (12)

विघातं चाधिषेकस्य रामयच विवासनम्।

राजः शोकं विलापं च परलोकस्य चाश्रयम् ॥ 13  ॥

interruption of the installation caused by Kaikeyi and Śri Rāma's exile to the forest; the king's grief and lament and eventual departure to the other world; (13)

प्रकृतीनां विषादं च प्रकृतीनां विसर्जनम्।

निषादाधियसंवादं सृतोपावर्तेनं तथा ॥ 14  ॥

the grief of the people of Ayodhyā and how those who followed him to the forest were made to return by being put off the scent; his dialogue with the chief of the Nisādas and how the charioteer, who took Śri Rāma, Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa in a chariot to the forest under the king's command, was sent back by Śri Rāma after his meeting with the Nisāda chief; (14)

गड़्गायाश्रापि संतारं भरद्राजस्य दर्शनम्।

भरद्राजाध्यनुजानाच्चिक्यकृटस्य दर्शनम् ॥ 15  ॥

how he ferried across the Gaṅgā and called on the sage Bharadwāja, and his going to Cīrakūta on the latter's instruction; (15)

वास्तुकर्म निवेशं च भरतागमनं तथा।

प्रसादनं च रास्य स्थितुः सलिलक्रियम् ॥ 16  ॥

his erection of a leaf-thatched hut at Cītrakūta and taking up his residence there alongwith his spouse and younger brother; the arrival of Bharata and how he tried to persuade Śri Rāma to return to Ayodhyā

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

and accept his rightful heritage in the shape of the throne of Ayodhyā and how Śrī Rāma offered water to the spirit of his deceased father as his last obsequies to the latter;(16)

पादुकाग्राशिषेकं च निद्रायमनिवासनम्।

दण्डकारणयमानं विराधस्य वधं तथा ॥ 17  ॥

how Bharata installed on the throne of Ayodhyā as the symbol of Śrī Rāma the pre-eminent wooden sandals that had the unique honour of being used by the divine Śrī Rāma and had been given by the latter to Bharata as a token of his affection and regard for his younger brother, and took up his residence at Nandigrāma, now a lonely retreat fourteen miles away from Ayodhyā; Rāma's departure to the forest of Dandaka (for fear of being approached every now and then by the people of Ayodhyā, now that they had come to know of his being there) and his killing the ogre, Virādha;

(17)

दर्शनं शरभझस्य सुतीक्षणेन समागमम्।

अनसूयासमाख्यां च अज्ञरागस्य चापर्णम् ॥ 18  ॥

his visit to the sage Śarabhaṅga and meeting with Sutiṣṇa, a pupil of the illustrious sage Agastya; Sita's meeting with Anasūyā, the wife of the great sage Atri, and the latter's offering sandal-paste etc., to the former as a gesture of goodwill; (18)

दूर्शनं चाय्यनस्यस्य धनुषो ग्रहणं तथा।

शूर्पणख्याश्र संवादं विक्तपकरणं तथा ॥ 19  ॥

his visit to the sage Agastya and worship by the latter; his accepting a bow belonging to Lord Viṣnu and presented by the sage considering him to be eminently fit to receive and wield it, especially for his future conflict with Rāvaṇa; Śūrpanakha's overtures for marriage to Śri Rāma and her disfigurement at the hands of Lakṣmana, who lopped off her ears and nose with a sword; (19)

वधं खरिशिरसोकृत्थानं वाणस्य च।

मारीचस्य वधं चैव वैदेहा हरणं तथा ॥ 20  ॥

the destruction of the ogres Khara and

Triśirā as well as of Dūṣṇa and others and Rāvaṇa's machination to carry off Sitā; the destruction of Mārica, disguised as a golden deer, by Śri Rāma and the abduction by Rāvaṇa of Sitā (the daughter of King Janaka, also called Videha); (20)

त्यावस्य विलापं च गृधराजनिबहंणम्।

कन्धसदर्शनं चैव पमायाश्राति दर्शनम् ॥ 21  ॥

Śrī Rāma's lament over the disappearance of Sītā and the death at Rāvana's hands of Jatāyu, the chief of the vultures; the sight of and encounter with Kabandha (a demon without head and legs and consisting of a mere trunk with long arms and a huge mouth in his belly, his head and thighs having been forced into his body by a blow from Indra's thunderbolt) as well as of the Pampā lake; (21)

शबरीदर्शने चैव फलमूलाशन तथा।

प्रलापं चैव पमायांं हनुमहर्शनं तथा १ २ २ ||

a visit to Śabari (an ascetic woman) and partaking of fruits and roots offered by her by way of hospitality; Śrī Rāma's raving over the loss of his spouse and his meeting with Hanūmān on the bank of the Pampā lake; (22)

त्रश्यमूकस्य गमनं सुग्रीवेण समागमम्।

प्रत्ययोत्पादनं सख्ये वालित्युगीविवग्रहम् ॥ 23  ॥

his arrival at Mount Rşyamūka where the monkey chief, Sugriva, was encamping in fear of his elder brother, Vāli, by whom he had been exiled and robbed even of his wife, and meeting with Sugriva; his inspiring confidence in the heart of Sugriva by kicking the skeleton of the demon Dundubhi to a long distance and piercing with one single arrow as many as seven palmyra trees standing in a row, and friendship with him; the combat between Vāli and Sugriva; (23)

<table><tr><td>वालिप्रमथनं</td><td>चैव</td><td>सुप्रीव्रतिपादनम्।</td></tr><tr><td>ताराखिलापं</td><td>समयं</td><td>वर्षैरात्रनावसमम्। 24  ॥</td></tr></table>

the destruction of Vāli and the installation of Sugriva on the throne of Kişkindhā; the

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

lament of Tārā, Vāli's widow; understanding with Sugriva (that at the end of the monsoon messengers would be sent in all directions to trace the whereabouts of Sitā) and Śri Rāma's sojourn on Mount Rṣyamūka during the days of the monsoon; (24)

कोपं राघवसिंहस्य बलानामुपसंग्रहम्।

दिशः प्रस्थापनं चैव पृथिथ्याश्रु निवेदनम् ॥ 25  ॥

the apparent indignation at the negligence of Sugriva of Śri Rāma, a lion among the scions of Raghu and Sugriva's mustering forces for being sent all over in quest of Sita and despatching teams of monkeys in all directions and Sugriva's description of the various divisions and subdivisions of the earth for the information of the monkeys to be sent in search of Sita; (25)

अङ्गुलीयकर्तानं च ऋक्षस्य बिलदर्शनम्।

प्रायोपवेशनं चैव सम्पातेरचापि दर्शनम् ॥ 26  ॥

Śrī Rāma's handing over his ring to Hanumān; how the monkeys sent in search of Sita in a southerly direction under the leadership of Angada, the crown-prince of Kişkindhā, saw the cave of a bear and sat fasting unto death on the sea-shore in a desparate mood on their failure to get any clue to the whereabouts of Sita and how they met Sampati, the elder brother of Jatāyu; (26)

पर्वतारोहणं चैव सागरस्यामि लढ़न्म। स्मूरवचनाच्यैव मैनाकस्य च दर्शनम् ॥ 27  ॥

How Hanumán climbed Mount Mahendra in order to leap across the sea and eventually crossed the ocean and how again he saw and talked with Mount Maināka (son of Himālaya) that had emerged from the ocean at the instance of the sea-god;

(27)

राक्षसीतर्नं चैवच्छायाग्राहस्य दर्शनम्।

सिंहिकायाश्च निधनं लढ़ामलयदर्शनम् ॥ 26  ॥

how he was threatened by Surasā,

who came disguised as an ogress, and

Larkīnī, an ogress by her very birth and how he saw and eventually brought about the death of the demoness Sirnhikā, who brought down flying birds by capturing them by their shadow, and saw the part of Mount Trikūta on which stood Lanka; (28)

राजी लड़ूप्रवेशं च एकस्यापि विचिनतनम्।

आपानभूमिणमनमवरोधस्य दर्भनम् ॥ 21  ॥

his entry into Lanka by night to avoid detection by the enemy and how he reflected all by himself on his future plan; his visit to the alehouse and looking round the gynaeceum of Ravana; (29)

दर्शनं रावणस्यापि पुष्यकस्य च दर्शनम्।

अशोकवनिकायानं सीतायाश्चापि दर्शनम् ॥ 30  ॥

how he beheld Rāvana as well as the Puspaka (his aerial car snatched from Kubera, the god of riches) and reaching Aśokavana (a grove mainly consisting of Aśoka trees), had a look at Sitā; (30)

अधिज्ञानप्रदानं च सीतायाश्चापि भाषणम्।

राक्षसीतर्नं चैव जितरास्पदर्भानम् ॥ 31  ॥

his handing over the ring of Śri Rāma to Sitā as a proof of his identity and Sitā's talk with him; how she was threatened by the ogresses appointed by Rāvana to guard Sitā and bring her round and how Trijatā, a daughter of Vibhiṣana, also placed by her side, saw dreams auguring well for Śri Rāma; (31)

मणिप्रदानं सीताया वृक्षभङ्ग तथैव च।

राक्षसीविर्बं चैव किंकराणां निबहंणम् ॥ 32  ॥

how Sitā gave her own jewel for the head to Hanumān as a proof of his having met her and how the trees of the grove were destroyed by Hanumān in order to convince Sitā of his extraordinary might and ability to liberate her from Rāvaṇa's captivity; the flight of the ogresses guarding Sitā and the destruction by Hanumān of the followers of Rāvaṇa, guarding the grove;

(32)

* VÅLMÍKI-RÅMÅYANA *

प्रहण वायुस्नोषच लड़ावाहाधिभार्जनम्।

प्रतिल्वनमेवाथ मधृतां हरणं तथा ॥ 33  ॥

the apprehension by Rāvaṇa of Hanumān, son of the wind-god, and how he roared while setting Lanka on fire, how he leapt back across the sea and he and the other monkeys forcibly partook, in exultation over the success of their mission, of the honey collected in Madhuvana, setting at nought the guards of Sugriva, to whom the garden belonged; (33)

राघवाघासनं चैव मणिनियतंतं तथा।

संगमं च समुद्रेन नलसोतोघच बन्धनम् ॥ 34  ॥

how Hanumān brought solace to Śrī Rāma by telling him of his having seen Sita and handed over to him the jewel given to him by Sita; How Śrī Rāma set out on an expedition to Lanka along with Sugriva and his huge army of monkeys to recover Sita; how they met the god presiding over the oceans in person at the sea-shore and (with his assurance to help) how a bridge was built across the sea by the monkey chief, Nala; (34)

प्रतरं च समुद्रस्य राजौ लढ़ावरोधनम्।

विभीषणेन संसर्ग वधोपायनिवेदनम्। 35  ॥

how the army crossed the sea (over the bridge so built) and besieged Lanka at night; the contact of Śri Rāma with Vibhiṣaṇa (Rāvaṇa's youngest brother and a great devotee of Śri Rāma) and how he told Śri Rāma of the ways and means of killing Rāvaṇa and others; (35)

कृप्यकर्णस्य निधनं मेघनादनिबहींणम्।

रावणस्य विनाशं च सीतावासिमरे: पुरे ॥ 36  ॥

The death of Kumbhakarna, the younger brother of Rāvana; the destruction of Meghanāda, the eldest son of Rāvana and the crown-prince of Lankā; the disposal of Rāvana and the recovery of Sitā at the enemy's capital; (36)

विभीषणार्थिके च पुष्यकस्य च दर्शनम्।

अयोक्षायाश्र गमनं भट्राजसमागमम् ॥ 37  ॥

the installation of Vibhiṣana on the throne of Lanka; how Śri Rāma saw Puspaka, the aerial car belonging to Rāvaṇa, and flew in it towards Ayodhya; his landing at Prayāga and meeting with the sage, Bharadvāja; (37)

प्रेषण वायुपुत्रस्य भरतेन समागमम्।

रामार्थपैकाध्ययुदरं सर्वसै-यविसर्जनम्।

स्वराष्ट्रज्ञनं चैव वैदेह्राश्र विसर्जनम् ॥ 38  ॥

how Hanumān, son of the wind-god, was despatched in advance to Ayodhyā to meet Bharata and apprise him of Śri Rāma's return and the subsequent meeting of Śri Rāma with Bharata; the festivities connected with the coronation of Śri Rāma and how the whole host of monkeys was disbanded and sent away to their respective homes; how Śri Rāma won the heart of his people by his loving rule and exiled Sītā, the daughter of King Janaka, also called Videha. (38)

अनागतं च यत् किंचिद् रामस्य वसुधातले ।

तच्चकारोत्ते काव्ये वाल्मीकर्भभावानृपि: ॥ 39  ॥

Nay, Vālmiki, the glorious sage, also described in his superb poem whatever deeds were yet to be performed on earth by Śri Rāma. (39)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाल्ये बालकारणे तृतीय: सर्ग: ॥ 3  ॥

Thus ends Canto Three in the Bálakānda of the glorious Ramāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

[Unreadable]

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

चतुर्थे: सर्गे:

Canto IV

After his ascension to the throne of Ayodhyā, Śrī Rāma listens to his own story as sung by his sons (Kuśa and Lava)

प्रासारान्यस्य रामस्य वाल्मीकिभगवानुषि: । चकार चरितं कृत्वं विविघवरुदमथंवत् ॥ 1  ॥

The glorious sage Vālmiki composed a poem, consisting of marvellous expressions and full of excellent topics, depicting the whole life-story of Śri Rāma, who had since regained his kingdom after returning from the woods. (1)

चतुर्विशलसहस्राणि श्लोकानामुक्तवानुषि: ।

तथा सर्गेशान् पत्र चर् काण्डानि तथोतम् ॥ 2  ॥

The sage uttered twenty-four thousand verses and made out of them six Kāṇḍas, consisting of five hundred (and odd) cantos, and an Uttarakāṇḍa, the epilogue. (2)

कृत्वा तु तम्हाप्राजः सभविध्यं सहोतरम्।

चित्तयामास को चेतत् प्रयुज्ञोवादिति प्रभु: ॥ 3  ॥

Having duly completed it along with the Uttarakāṇḍa, dealing with the future events of Śrī Rāma's life, the highly intelligent Vālmiki contemplated as to what man endowed with a powerful memory could possibly recite it before audiences. (3)

तस्य चिन्तयमानस्य महर्षेभवितात्मन: ।

अग्रहीतां ततः पादौ मुनिवेशी कुशीलवौ ॥ 4  ॥

While that great seer of purified mind was pondering as aforesaid, Kuśa and Lava, the two sons of Śri Rāma, brought forth by Sītā during her exile at the hermitage of Vālmiki, by whom she had been given shelter and who had thus been the godfather of the two boys, presently appeared in the garb of hermits and caught hold of his feet as a mark of respect. (4)

कुशीलो तु धर्मजी राजपूजी यशसित्नो।

भातरी स्वरसम्पजी ददर्शीभमवासिनी ॥ 5  ॥

Valmiki cast a glance at Kuśa and Lava, the two co-uterine princes, who had been living since their very birth in his own hermitage as his godsons and pupils, who knew their duty towards their godfather and teacher and had actually acquired great fame by virtue of their devotion to the sage and were, besides, gifted with a musical voice and adepts in the science of music.

(5)

स तु मेधाविनो दूषा वेदेषु परिनिशिता।

वेदोपबृहणाधाय तवाग्रहचत प्रभु: ॥ 6  ॥

काव्यं रामायणं कृत्वं सीतायाश्रितं महत्।

पीतस्प्ववधमित्वेवं चकार चरित्वतः ॥ 7  ॥

Seeing the two boys endowed with exceptional talent and well-versed in the Vedas, the glorious sage, who had observed sacred vows all his life and had thereby acquired the capacity to undertake this stupendous task, taught them, with the object of enlightening them on the meaning of the Vedas, the whole of the great poem of the Rāmāyaṇa, (mainly) consisting of the story of Sitā and entitled “Paulastya Vadha”, an account of the death of Ravana, the grandson of Pulasti, a mind-born son of Brahma. (6-7)

पाठके गेये च मधुरं प्रमाणौरिक्रधरित्वतम्।

जातिभिः ससधिर्युक्ते तन्यीलयसमवित्तम् ॥ 8  ॥

सः शुज्राकरणाहास्यरौह्रभयानकैः ।

बीरादिधी रसैयुक्तं काव्यमेतदगायातम् ॥ 9  ॥

The two boys chanted this poem, which was delightful to read and chant, could be adapted to the three measures of time (slow, medium and quick), could be sung to the lute with proper rhythm and in the seven notes of the gamut and was



characterized by the nine sentiments of love, pathos, mirth, wrath, terror and heroism etc., including disgust, wonder and serenity. (8-9)

तौ तु ग्राश्वतत्वज्ञी स्थानमूच्छनकोविव्ति।

भातरी स्वरसम्पज्ञी गन्थवांविव स्विपणी ॥ 10  ॥

The two brothers were really masters of music, possessed knowledge of the threefold source of the modulations of the voice, viz., the lungs, the throat and the cerebrum, and also knew how to play upon the lute etc., had a sweet voice like the Gandharvas, celestial musicians, and were handsome too like them (i.e., Gandharvas). (10)

रूपलक्षणसम्यजीमधूरस्टभाविणी ।

बिब्यादिवेशित्वी बिब्यों रामदेहात् तथापरी ॥ 11  ॥

Endowed with physical charm and auspicious marks on their body, they spoke in a sweet strain and, like two images made from the original, they looked like two other Rāmas sprung from the loins of Śri Rāma. (11)

तौ राजपुत्री काल्येन थध्यमाख्यानमुत्तमम्।

वाचोविधेयं तत् सर्व कृत्वा काव्यमर्निच्छिति ॥ 12  ॥

त्रशपीणं च द्विजातीनां साधूनां च समागमे।

यथोपदेशं तत्वज्ञी जगतु: सुसमाहिति ॥ 13  ॥

Having committed to memory the whole of that exquisite and historical poem, the Rāmāyana, which was entirely devoted to virtue, the two irreproachable princes, who knew the real purport of the Vedas and other scriptures, chanted it even as they had been instructed, with their mind fully concentrated, in a concourse of seers, members of the twice-born classes and other pious men. (12-13)

महात्मानी महाभागी सर्वक्षणलक्षिति।

तौ कदाचित् समेतानामृषीणां भावितात्मान् ॥ 14  ॥

मध्येपशं समीपस्थाविदं काव्यमगावताम्।

तच्छुला मुनयः सर्वे बाषयपार्कुलेक्षणा: ॥ 15  ॥

साधु साध्विति तावृचुः परं विस्मयमागता:।

ते प्रीतमनसः सर्वे मुनयो धार्वतसला: ॥ 16  ॥

प्रशुशंसु: प्रशस्त्वी गायमानी कुशीलवो।

अहो गीतस्य माध्यूँरू रूलोकानां च विशेषतः ॥ 17  ॥

On a certain day the two boys, who were exceptionally talented, highly blessed and equipped with all good qualities, chanted the poem in open assembly standing by the side of the assembled seers of purified mind. Seized with great wonder to hear it, the sages universally applauded them, saying "Well done ! Excellent !!", their eyes bedimmed with tears. Delighted in mind, the sages, who were all virtue-loving, extolled in the following words both the singers, Kuśa and Lava, who deserved all praise: "Wonderful is the melody of music, and particularly the recitation of the verses! (14-17)

चित्रनिर्वृतनघयेत्त प्रव्यक्षमिव दर्शितम्।

प्रविश्य तत्वुभी सुच्छु तत्थाभवमगायतम् ॥ 18  ॥

सहिती मधुरे रक्तं सम्पत्रं स्वरसम्पदा।

एवं प्रश्यस्मानौ तो तपःशलाधैर्महर्षिभः ॥ 19  ॥

संरक्ततरमवर्धं मधुरं तावागयातम्।

प्रीतः कविश्मुनितताभ्यां संस्थितः करणं ददो ॥ 20  ॥

“Though the events took place long ago, the picture has been vividly placed before the eye as though it belonged to the present. Having entered into the spirit of the poem, the two princes chanted it with one voice exquisitely, in a sweet loving tone and with all the richness of music!” Being applauded thus by eminent seers, deserving of praise for their asceticism, the two boys sang all the more sweetly and with deeper emotion. Pleased with them and getting up as a mark of admiration, a certain sage presented to them a pitcher. (18-20)

प्रसत्रो वर्कल्नं कधिशू ददौ ताभ्यां महायशना: ।

अन्यः कृष्णाजिनमदाद् यजसूत्रं तथापरः ॥ 21  ॥

Full of delight, a certain sage, who had earned great fame for his proficiency in the science of music, gave them the bark of a tree for being used as loin-cloth. Another gave them the skin of a black deer and still another a sacred thread for being worn baldric wise. (21)

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

کایزش کمپردنل و Barrierامی آشامه‌ی مهرامئین: 1

وغیریمانستار، پارادتر کایینمپرسی میزین: 11 22 11

A certain sage gave them a Kamandalu (a drinking-vessel made of wild coconut), while another great sage gave them a girdle of Muñja grass. Yet another gave them on the said occasion a Kuśa mat (worthy of sages), while still another gave them a strip of cloth for covering the privities with. (22) تاموای दens تیدا تیدا خو: کوترامپرسی میزین: کاناليمامپرسی برجک کیریموای تیدا میزین: 11 23 11

Full of joy, another hermit gave them on that occasion a hatchet for cutting wood; another, a piece of brown-red cloth (generally used by Brahmacāris and recluses); while still another hermit gave them a scarf. (23)

نجارادخاممامحستو کاودراکنز مُدزالین: 1

وزمپانودمشید: کایختر کاودپاریرا نعتاام: 1 2 3 4 1

Full of joy, yet another gave them a string for binding one's matted hair and a cord for tying together a bundle of pieces of wood. A certain seer gave them a sacrificial vessel, while another gave them a faggot. (24)

آسیدوزیر آوسیمای:裂试机击机机击击机机击击机机击击机机击击机机击击机机击击机机击击机机击击机机击击机

Yet another gave them a wooden seat made out of an Udumbara tree, while some invoked blessings on them on that occasion. Full of joy, other great seers present there blessed them with long life. (25)

دردیخ وارن وسیّ مُزس: سُزْسَارِدز: ۱

آسَافْزِيمِزِسَازِهَانٍ مُزِسَنٍ سُزْسَاكِزِسَازِسٍ ۲۶ ۱۱

In this way the sages present in that assembly, who all habitually spoke the truth, bestowed boons on the two princes and said, "Wonderful is this narrative exquisitely told at length by the sage Valmiki. (26)

परं कवीनाभार्यर समासं च यथाक्रम्।

अधिगीतमिदं गीतं सर्वगीतिषु कोविद्धि। 127 ॥

"It will serve as the chief support for future poets and has been concluded with due regard to the sequence of events. This song has been beautifully sung by you, O princes, well-versed in all styles of singing! (27)

आयुध्यं पृष्टिजननं सर्वश्रुतिमनोहम्।

प्रशल्यमानी सर्वत्रे कदाचित् तत्र गायकों ॥ 28  ॥

रथ्यासु राजामांगेषु ददर्शं भरताप्रजः ।

स्ववेश्म चानीय ततो भातरी स कुशीलकवी ॥ 29  ॥

पूजयामास पूजाहौं रामः शत्रुनिबहणः ।

आसीनः काङ्गे दिव्ये स च सिंहासने प्रभुः ॥ 30  ॥

उपोपविष्टे: सचिवेश्रांतुभिश्र प्रस्मित्वतः ।

दृष्टा तु रूपसम्पजी विनीती भातरावृषी ॥ 31  ॥

उवाच लक्ष्मणं रामः शत्रुभं भरतं तथा ।

श्रुस्तामेतदाख्याननयोदैवबचंसोः ॥ 32  ॥

विचित्राश्रयदं सव्यम् गायकों समचोद्यत्।

तो चापि मधुरं रक्त स्वचित्चायतर्पि:स्वनम् ॥ 33  ॥

तन्त्रीलयवद्त्यर्श विश्रत्थार्थमायताम् ।

हृदायत् सर्वेगात्राणि मनासि हृदयानि च।

श्रोत्राश्रयसुखं गेयं तद् बभी जनसंसदि ॥ 34  ॥

"It is conducive to long life, begets prosperity and ravishes the ears and mind of all who listen to it." One day Śri Rāma, the elder brother of Bharata, beheld the two singers roaming about chanting the Rāmāyana in the lanes and streets of Ayodhyā and being applauded everywhere. Bringing the two brothers, Kuśa and Lava, to his own palace and offering them an exalted seat, the aforesaid Rāma, the destroyer of his foes, then duly entertained them, deserving of honour as they were. Seated on his celestial throne of gold and surrounded by his ministers as well as by his own brothers seated beside him, and casting a look at the two brothers, who were not only endowed with a charming appearance but modest too, the aforesaid King Rāma addressed Bharata, Lakṣmana and Sātrughna as follows: "Let this narrative couched in wonderful expressions and dealing with diverse topics, be carefully heard



by you from the lips of these two boys possessing the splendour of gods." At the same time he urged the two singers to commence their recitation. They too chanted the poem, whose theme was too well-known, in a melodious and lovable tone, sweet as the sound of a lute, nay, raised to a pitch conformable to one's will and agreeable to the mind of the listeners. That song, which sent a thrill through all the limbs and gladdened the mind as well as the heart of the listeners and was delightful to the ear, made its mark in any gathering of men.

(28-34)

इसी मृनी पार्थिवल्बणाप्रियती कुशीलवी चैव महातपर्यिति ।

ममापि तद् भूक्तिकं प्रचक्षते महानुभावं चरितं निवेशित ॥ 35  ॥

"These two singers," observed Śri Rāma, "are endowed with the auspicious

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे चतुर्धः सर्प: ॥ 4  ॥

Thus ends Canto Four in the Bálakāṇḍa of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

पञ्रमः सर्गः

Canto V

A description of the city of Ayodhyā

सर्वा पूर्वीमयं येघामासीत् कृत्वा वसुंधरा।

प्रजापतिम्पादाय नृपाणां जयशालिनाम् ॥ 1  ॥

This entire globe has been the exclusive property of victorious kings, commencing from Vaivaswata Manu, a lord of created beings. (1)

येघां स सगरो नाम सागरो येन खातिनतः ।

षटिपुत्रसहस्वाणि यं यानां पर्यवारवर्ण ॥ 2  ॥

In their line appeared the celebrated king, Sagara by name, by whom was hollowed out the ocean and whom, even as he went out

on an expedition to chastise his enemies, his sixty thousand sons followed. (2)

इश्वाकुणामिदं तेषां राजां वंशे महात्मान्।

महदुपन्रमाख्यानं रामायणमिति श्रुतम् ॥ 3  ॥

This great story, known by the name of “Ramāyana”, has its seeds in the line of the same high-souled kings tracing their descent from Ikswāku, the eldest son of Vaivaswata: so it is heard. (3)

तदिदं वर्तीर्थ्यावः सर्वे नितिखलमादितः ।

धर्मकामार्थसहितं श्रोतत्य्वमनसूयता ॥ 4  ॥

* Our Śāstras mention two styles of singing, the Mārga style and the Deśī style. The former is resorted to in singing songs in Sanskrit, while the latter is used in singing songs in the various Prākṛta dialects or vernaculars.



"We two, Kuša and Lava, shall presently sing from the very beginning in all its details the whole of this story, which is conducive to piety, worldly prosperity and senseenjoyment alongwith Liberation. It should be heard by one who is free from a carping spirit. (4)

कोसलो नाम मुदितः स्मीतो जनपदो महान्।

निविष्ट सरयूतीरे प्रभृतधनधान्यवान् ॥ 5  ॥

There is a great principality, known by the name of Kosala, extending along the bank of the Sarayū. It is happy and prosperous, nay, full of abundant riches and plenty of food-grains. (5)

अयोध्या नाम नगरी ततासील्लोकविश्रुता ।

मनुना मानवेत्रण या पुरी निर्मिता स्वयम् ॥ 6  ॥

In it stands comprised the world-renowned city, Ayodhyā by name, a city which was built by dint of his own volition by Vaivaswata Manu, the ruler of mankind. (6)

आयता दर्श च हे च योजनानि महापुरी ।

श्रीमती जीण विस्तीणां सुविधकमहापथा ॥ 9  ॥

That great and glorious city with its well-aligned roads is twelve Yojanas (ninety-six miles) long and three Yojanas (twenty-four miles) wide. (7)

राजमार्गेण महता सुविधकेन शोभिता ।

मुक्तपुधावकीर्णेन जलसिकेन निवस्य: ॥ 8  ॥

It is graced with a beautifully ramified extensive highway, which is daily sprinkled all along with water and strewn with flowers dropped from the heavens by celestial damsels, who hover over the city to have a look at it and pay their homage to it. (8)

तां तु राजा दशरथो महाराष्ट्रविश्वधनः ।

पुरीमावासयामास दिवि देवपतिर्थां ॥ 9  ॥

King Dásaratha, who promoted his great kingdom to a pre-eminent degree by virtue of his righteous and benevolent rule, really made the city more populous even as Indra,

the ruler of the gods, adds to the population of his own capital, Amarāvatī, in heaven.

(9)

कपाटतोरणावर्ती सुविष्णक्तानतरणणम्।

सर्वयन्यायुधवतीमृषितां सर्वशिल्पिधः ॥ 10  ॥

It has arched gateways with beautiful doors, is provided with well-laid out markets and equipped with all sorts of catapults and weapons and is peopled by all classes of craftsmen. (10)

सूतमागशसव्याधां श्रीमतीमतुलप्रभाम्।

उच्चातुलध्यजवर्ती शतल्हीशतसंकुलाम् ॥ 11  ॥

Crowded with panegyristis and bards, it is prosperous and possessed of matchless splendour, is marked with tall attics and flags and equipped with numberless Sataghnis (interpreted by some as a kind of rocket and by others as iron pikes). (11)

वधूनाटकसंपैशु संयुक्तां सर्वतः पुरीम्।

उद्यानाभवणोपेतां महर्ती सालमेखलाम् ॥ 12  ॥

The great city is enriched with troupes of female dancers on all sides and graced with orchards in the shape of mango groves and is enclosed by a defensive wall. (12)

दुर्गीम्भीरपरिखां दुर्गामन्यैदुरासदाम्।

वाजिवारणसम्पूर्णां गोर्भिभट्टै: खरेस्तथा ॥ 13  ॥

Encircled by a deep moat which cannot be easily entered or crossed, the city is difficult of access and cannot be easily approached by enemies. It abounds in horses and elephants, cows, camels and donkeys. (13)

सामन्तराजसंदैश बलिकर्मीभरावृताम्।

नानादेशनिवासैस्व वर्णिरिभस्पशोपशिताम् ॥ 14  ॥

It is ever thronged with crowds of feudatory princes that flock from all sides on the mission of paying their annual tribute, and is graced with the presence of traders inhabiting different countries. (14)

प्रासादे रत्नविकृतेः पवेर्वित्र शोभिताम्।

कूटागरैश सम्पूर्णामिन्रस्येवामरवातीम् ॥ 15  ॥

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

Adorned with mountain-like mansions built of precious stones, and thickly set with attics, it looks like Indra's Amarāvatī. (15)

विद्यामध्यापत्कारां वरनारीगणायतुतम्

सर्वेलसमाकीणाँ विमानगृहशोभिताम् ॥ 16  ॥

Presenting a colourful appearance, it is laid out after the design of a dice-board, is thronged with bevies of lovely women and full of all varieties of precious stones, and is embellished with seven-storied buildings. (16)

गृहगाढामविक्छत्रां समभूमौ निवेशिताम्।

शार्तिलतबुलसम्पूर्णामिश्रुकाण्डरसोदकाम् ॥ 17  ॥

Thick with houses, it is faultless of design and has been built on a level ground, abounds in rice and contains water sweet as the juice of a sugar-cane. (17)

दुर्दुभीधिभूदईश्छे वीणाधिभः पणावैस्थला।

नादितां भुगमत्यर्थ पृथिव्यां तामनुत्तमम् ॥ 18  ॥

Made deeply resonant with the sound of kettledrums, clay totmoms, lutes and drums, it is altogether unexcelled on the earth. (18)

विमानमिव सिद्धानां तपसाधिभर्ते दिवि।

सुनिवेशितवेशमानां नरोत्मसमावुताम् ॥ 91  ॥

With its well-arranged houses it looks like a row of aerial cars in heaven belonging to Siddhas (a class of semi-divine beings naturally endowed with mystic powers) and attained through askesis, and is inhabited by jewels among men. (19)

ये च बाणौर्ने विध्यन्ति विविक्तमपरायम्।

श्रब्दवेध्यं च विततं लघुरुस्ता विश्रापरादः ॥ 20  ॥

सिंह्वल्यप्रवराहाणां मतानां नतदां वने ।

इत्नारो निशितैः शर्येबैलाद् बाहुबलैरपि ॥ 21  ॥

It is crowded on all sides with thousands of great car-warriors \( ^{1} \) who never strike with arrows an isolated warrior, one who has no father or son, one who, being out of sight, could only be struck with the help of his voice or who has fled from an encounter—warriors who are not only skilled archers but also well-versed in the use of all kinds of arms, nay, who kill with violence by means of sharp-edged missiles and even with the might of arms (unaided by weapons) lions, tigers and boars furiously roaring in the woods. (20-21)

तादुपानां सहर्शैस्तामधिपूर्णां महारथेः।

पुरीमावासवमायास राजा दर्शस्थस्तदा ॥ 22  ॥

तामीनमिद्धिरुणविद्धिरावृतां द्विजोनमैदेवप्रडुपारगेः।

सहस्वै: सत्यतर्मेहात्वधिर्महिकल्पैर्हितिध्धि केवलै: ॥ 23  ॥

It is such a city that King Dásaratha re-populated in those days—a city which is peopled by the foremost of Brāhmanas, who maintain and worship the sacred fire, are adorned with good qualities, have mastered the Vedas as well as the six branches \( ^{2} \) of knowledge auxiliary to the study of the Vedas by high-souled men, who give away in abundance and are devoted to truth, as well as by eminent seers who are almost as good as Maharşis. (22-23)

इत्याई श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पखाम: सर्ग: ॥ 5  ॥

Thus ends Canto Five in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Valmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

1. A Mahāratha (a great car-warrior) has been defined in our scriptures as below :

आकानां सारथि चाधान् त्वत् युवेय तो नः : स महारथकंसः यन्त् —— ||

"A man who is able to fight while defending himself, his charioteer and horses enjoys the title of a Mahāratha."

According to another definition a Mahāratha is he who is able to fight single-handed ten thousand archers—एको दास सहस्थानी योथयेय यन्त् धयितवान्।

2. The six branches of knowledge auxiliary to a study of the Vedas are: (1) Śiksā (Phonetics), (2) Vyākaraṇa (Grammar), (3) Chandas (Prosody), (4) Nirukta (Etymology), (5) Jyautiṣa (Astronomy) and (6) Kalpa (which prescribes the ritual and gives rules for ceremonial or sacrificial acts).

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

घुः सर्गः

Canto VI

A description of the city of Ayodhyā and the prosperity of its inhabitants during the reign of King Dásaratha

तस्यां पुर्यमवोध्यायां वेदवित् सर्वसंग्रहः ।

दीर्घवर्गों महातेजाः पोराजान्पद्धिप्रयः ॥ 1  ॥

While living in the city of Ayodhyā, King Dásaratha protected his subjects. He was well-versed in the Vedas and collected all useful things. He was farsighted and highly glorious and was loved by the people inhabiting the city as well as the countryside. (1)

इंक्ष्वाकृणमातिरोध यन्या धर्मपोरो वर्गी ।

महाधिकल्पो राजर्षिस्वपु लोकपु विश्रुतः ॥ 2  ॥

He was a superlative car-hero (Atiratha)* of Ikswāku's race. He was fond of performing sacrifices, devoted to virtue and given to the control of his senses. He was a royal sage almost as good as a Maharṣi. He enjoyed a good reputation in all the three worlds. (2)

बलवान् निह्तामिचे मित्रवान् विजितेन्द्रस्य:।

धनैश संचवैश्रायैः शक्रवैश्वणोपामः ॥ 3  ॥

He was strong and devoid of foes. He had a number of allies and was the conqueror of his senses. In point of amassing wealth and other things, he was a compeer of Indra and Kubera. (3)

यथा मनुमहृतेजा लोकस्य परिसंक्षिता।

तथा दूरायो राजा लोकस्य परिसंक्षिता ॥ 4  ॥

Just as the highly glorious Manu protected the whole world, so did King Daśaratha. (4)

तेन सत्याधिसंधेन त्रिवर्मानुपतिहुता ।

पालिता सा पुरी श्रेष्ठा इन्ट्रोणामसारती ॥ 5  ॥

That king, who was true to his word and who was engaged in the pursuit of

wealth, religious merit and sense-enjoyment protected the foremost city of Ayodhyā, in the same way as Indra protected Amarāvatī. (5)

तस्मिन् पुरवरे हृधा धर्मात्मानो बहुभुक्ता ।

नरास्तुचा धनैः स्वैः स्वेरलुखाः सत्यवादिनः ॥ 6  ॥

The people of that city were happy, virtuous, learned in sacred lore, free from greed, truthful and contented with their own fortune. (6)

नाल्यसंपित्रियः कक्षिडासीत् तत्स्मि पुरोत्तमे।

कुटुब्बी यो हासिब्धार्योर्गवाङ्धधनाथ्यवान् ॥ 9  ॥

There was no householder in that great city who had not stored valuable things in abundance and had not attained the objects of human pursuit and who was in want of oxen, cows, horses and other wealth and foodgrains. (7)

कामी वा न कदर्यों वा नुशंस: पुरुषः कवचित्।

रूटुं शक्यमयोध्यायां नाविद्धान् न च नास्तिकः ॥ 8  ॥

There was no man to be seen in Ayodhyā who was sensuous, miserly, cruel, ignorant and unbelieving. (8)

सर्वे नाश्र यार्थच आर्मशीलाः सुसंयतः ।

मृदिताः शीलवृत्ताथ्यां महर्षे इवालमाः ॥ 9  ॥

All the men and women of that city were by nature virtuous, well-regulated in life, always cheerful and faultless in character and disposition like Maharsis. (9)

नाकुण्डली नामुकुटी नास्यली नाल्यभोगवान्।

नामुच्छे न नलिमाज्ञे नासुगम्ब्ध श्वित्ते ॥ 10  ॥

There was no one in Ayodhyā who was devoid of gold ear-rings, diadem and flower-wreaths. Nobody lacks in objects of

* An Atiratha is he who fights a number of Mahārathas alone.



enjoyment. There was none who did not put on a smart appearance after taking bath. No one was there who did not smear his body with sandal-paste and did not use scents. (10)

नामूछभोजी नादाता नायमनूढ़दनिष्कधूक ।

नाहस्ताभरणो वापि दुश्यते नाय्यानकवान् ॥ 11  ॥

Nobody was seen in Ayodhyà taking unholy food, not giving alms and not exercising control over his mind. No one was found there who had no gold bangles, a gold ornament for the neck and armlets on his person. (11)

नानाहताप्रियांच्या न शुउे वा न तस्करः।

कशिडासीदायेल्यायां न चावृतो न संकरः ॥ 12  ॥

There was none in Ayodhyā who did not maintain and worship the sacred fire and did not perform sacrifices; no one among them was petty-minded, given to thieving, immoral and impure of origin. (12)

स्वकर्मनिता निर्वं ब्राह्मणा विज्ञानेत्रिया:।

दानाध्ययनशीलाश्च संयताश्त्र प्रतिग्रहे ॥ 13  ॥

The Brāhmanas inhabiting Ayodhyā were ever devoted to their duties and exercised effective control over their senses. They gave away alms, pursued their studies and were disinclined to accept gifts. (13)

नासितको नान्ती वायि न कशिचदबहुशुः ।

नास्यको न चाशको नाविद्वान् विद्यते क्वचित् ॥ 14  ॥

There was no member of the twice-born classes who was unbelieving, untruthful, lacking in knowledge of scriptures, busy finding fault with others, resourceless and bereft of learning. (14)

नाघडईनिविद्यार्ति नावतो नासहसद: ।

न दीनः क्षिसचितो वा व्यथितो वापि करचना। १५. ॥

There was no one in that city who had not mastered the six branches of knowledge, auxiliary to a study of the Vedas, and did not observe pious vows. There was no donor of scanty gifts and no miserable man. There was none who was either distracted in mind or afflicted. (15)

कशिचत्रो वा नारी वा नाश्रीमान् नायरूपवान्।

उरूई शक्यमयोध्य्यां नाथि राजन्यभक्तिमान् ॥ 16  ॥

There was no man or woman in Ayodhyā who was devoid of splendour, not good-looking and not loyal to the king. (16)

वर्णैंच्य्यचतुर्थेयु देवतातिथिपुजका: ।

कृतजाश्च वदान्याश्च शूरा विक्रमसंयुता: ॥ 17  ॥

People belonging to all the four grades of society, with the Brāhmana as the foremost, were fond of worshipping the gods and unexpected visitors. They were grateful, generous, heroic and powerful. (17)

दीर्घायुगे ना: सर्वे धर्म सत्वे च संश्रिताः ।

सहिता: पुरुषोरैश्च नित्यं स्थीभः पुरोतमे ॥ 18  ॥

All the residents of that great city enjoyed a long lease of life and were devoted to virtue and truth, and as such were never deprived of their wives, sons, and grandsons. (18)

श्रत्रं ब्रह्ममुखं चारीद् वैश्या: क्षत्रमनुतः ।

श्रूत्रा: स्वकर्मनिरतास्वीन् वर्णानुपचारिण: ॥ 19  ॥

The Kṣatrijyas followed the lead of the Brahmanas, the Vaiśyas were devoted to the Kṣatrijyas and the Śūdras took delight in their own work while serving the other three Varnas. (19)

सा तेनेश्वकान्थेन पुरी सुपरिरक्षिता ।

यथा पुरस्तान्नुना मानवेरण धीमता ॥ 20  ॥

King Daśaratha, the lord of the Ikswākus, fully protected Ayodhyā on all sides in the same way as the all-wise Manu, the ruler of mankind, did in former times. (20)

योधानामग्रिकल्यानां पेशलानाममर्षिणाम्।

सम्पूर्णं कृतविद्यानां गृहा केसरिणामिव ॥ 21  ॥

Like a cave full of lions, the city was thronged with warriors who had mastered the science of archery and were refulgent like fire, devoid of crookedness and were unable to pocket insults. (21)

काम्योजविषये जातेवाहीकैश हयोतमे:।

वनायुर्नैदीजैश पूर्णा हरिध्योतमे: ॥ 22  ॥



It was crowded with horses of excellent breed born in the territories of Kamboja, Báhlika (Balkh) as well as in Vanāyu, river-horses (born in the Indus valley), horses that vied with the horse of god, Indra, known by the name of Uccaihśravā. (22)

विन्ययर्वतैजमैतै: पूर्णा हैमवतैरिप। मदार्वितैरितबलैमातैजै: पर्वतैतिपेमै: 11 23 11

It was full of elephants in heat and mighty as mountains, born in the Vindhya and the Himalayan regions. (23)

रोरावतकुलीनैश महापयाकुलैस्तथा।

अज्ञनादीय निष्क्रान्तैर्वमनादपि च द्विधे: 11 24 11

भद्रमेद्रमैंगीश्चैव भद्रमन्द्रमैंगीस्तथा।

भद्रमन्द्रभैम्रगैगमान्दैश सा पुर्णे 11 25 11

नित्यमनै: सदा पूर्णा नारीरचलसनिभे:।

सा योजने हे च भृय: सल्यनामा प्रकाशले।

यसां दर्शरशो राजा वससुगदपालयल्प 11 26 11

The city was also ever crowded with elephants belonging to the races of Airāvata, Mahāpadma, Anjana and Vāmana and those of the Bhadra, Mandra and Mrga species (born on the Himalayas and Sahya range respectively), as well as with those of cross-breeds known by the names of Bhadra-

Mandra-Mrgas, Bhadra-Mandras, Bhadra-Mrgas and Mrga-Mandras, ever in rut and huge as mountains. Ayodhyā (lit., unassailable) bears a really significant name, particularly to a width of two Yojanas or sixteen miles out of its total width of three Yojanas, twenty-four miles. While residing in this part of the city, King Daśaratha protected the Kingdom. (24-26)

तां पुरीं स महतोजा राजा द्वशरथो महान्।

शशास शमितामिचो नक्षजागपिव चन्द्रमा: ॥ 29  ॥

Just as the moon holds sway over the starry regions, similarly the said King Daśaratha, who was possessed of great glory and had destroyed all his enemies, ruled over the aforesaid city. (27)

तां सत्यनामां दुबतोरणाग्लां

गृहिंविंचिनेरूपगर्शीधतां शिवामु।

पुरीमयोध्यां नृसहससंकुलां शगासा वे शक्रमसो महीपति: ॥ 28  ॥

In this way the king, who vied with Indra, ruled over this blessed city of Ayodhyā, which bore a significant name, was protected with strong gates and bars and was graced with houses of various designs and teemed with thousands of men. (28)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीने आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे पछ्र: सर्ग: ॥ 6  ॥

Thus ends Canto Six in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

समम: सर्गे:

Canto VII

The virtue and upright conduct of the eight ministers of Emperor Daśaratha

तस्यामाता गुर्णोरासिद्धबाको: सुमहातपन: । मन्त्रजाश्रेक्त्रजाश्र पितर्वे प्रियस्ति ततः ॥ 1  ॥

The ministers of the exceptionally high-souled King Daśaratha, a scion of Ikswāku, knew how to weigh the pros and cons of a problem, could read the mind of

others and were ever devoted to the welfare of their beloved master. In short, they were endowed with all virtues appropriate to a minister. (1)

अष्टी बभूव्रींस्य तस्यामात्या यश्रस्विनः।

शुचयश्रान्ताक्ष शतकृत्येषु नित्यशः ॥ 2  ॥

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

Eight \( ^{1} \) were the ministers of that heroic king, who were all glorious, pure of mind and conduct and ever devoted to the interests of the king (i.e., affairs of the state). (2)

धृष्टिबंयन्तो विजय: सुराष्ट्रे वारूपद्धर्भनः।

अकोपो धर्मपालक्षु सुमनश्राष्टमोउधीर्वत्।। 3  ॥

They were Dhrṣṭi, Jayanta, Vijaya, Surāstra, Rāstravardhana, Akopa, Dharmapāla and Arthavit, Sumantra being the eighth. (3)

श्रलिजी हावधिमती तस्यास्ताम्यिसतमो।

वसिष्ठो वामदेवरच मन्त्रिणरच तथापरे ॥ 4  ॥

सुयज्ञेपथ जाबालिः कार्यपयोप्पथ गौतमः ।

मार्कण्डेयस्तु दीर्घीयुस्तथा कात्यायनो हिद्रजः ॥ 5  ॥

Vasistha and Vamadeva, the foremost of seers, were his two beloved family priests (and counsellors too). And there were other counsellors \( ^{2} \) too, viz., Suyajña and Jabáli, Káśyapa (a scion of Kaśyapa) and Gautama, the long-lived Markandeyda and the Brahmana Katyayana. (4-5)

एतेबंद्वार्थिभिन्तियमूलिजलस्य पोर्वकाः।

विद्वायिनीता हौमन्तः कुशला नियतेन्द्रिया: ॥ 6  ॥

श्रीमन्तश महात्मानः शरख्ना दुर्बिकिमाः ।

कॉलिंमन्तः प्रणिहिता यथावचनकारिण: ॥ 7  ॥

तेजः क्षमायश: प्रापा: सितमतुपूर्विभाघिण: ।

कोंधान् कामार्थहितांना न ब्रूदुपुन्ते वच: ॥ 8  ॥

Along with these Brāhmaṇa seers, his hereditary priests too ever functioned as his counsellors also. The ministers were all modest through learning, bashful by nature and clever, had fully controlled their senses, were affluent, high-souled, well-versed in the use of weapons, possessed of unbending prowess, glorious, vigilant, true to their word, majestic, forgiving and far-famed. They spoke with a smile ever playing on their lips and

would never tell a lie even in anger or for the sake of sense-enjoyment or wealth.

(6-8)

तेन्यामविदितं किंकित्त स्वेषु नास्ति परेषु वा।

क्रियमाणं कृतं वापि चारणापि चिकाकीर्षितम् ॥ 9  ॥

Nothing connected with their own people or with others was unknown to them; whatever was done or sought to be done by the people was known to them through spies. (9)

कुशला व्यवहारेषु सौहदेषु परीक्षिताः।

प्रासकलं यथा दण्डे धारयेषु: सुतेचपि ॥ 10  ॥

They were all tactful in their dealings with others, had been tried in the matter of loyalty, and meted out punishment even to their own sons, strictly according to the law when occasion demanded it. (10)

कोशसांसहणे युत्ता बलस्य च परिग्रहे।

अहितं चापि पुरुषं न हिस्युरिवदूषकम् ॥ 11  ॥

They were ever intent on augmenting the state exchequer and consolidating the army and did not persecute even an enemy if he was not found guilty. (11)

वीरारच नियतोलसाहा राजशास्यमनुष्टिता:।

शुचीर्ना रक्षितारूप चिन्व घवियवसिनाम् ॥ 1 2  ॥

They were great heroes with an undying zeal for warfare and followed the precepts of political science; they protected under all circumstances the people of good conduct in their state. (12)

ब्रह्मक्षत्रमहिंस्तते कौशं सम्पूर्यन्।

सुतीक्षण्डा: सम्प्रैक्ष्य पुरुषस्य बलाबलम् ॥ 13  ॥

They filled the coffers of the state without harassing the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya communities and inflicted heavy (or small) penalties, of course, after duly considering the abundant or meagre resources \( ^{3} \) of the

1. Manu has enjoined a king to have seven or eight tried ministers : मन्त्रण: सस वार्थे वा प्रकुवीत परिक्षितान्।

2. A minister (Amātya) is believed to have been charged with executive duties, while a Mantri (counsellor) is supposed to have exercised judicial powers—आमात्या देशादिकार्यिनिवाह्मा मन्त्रणो व्यवहाराद्वारा: ।

3. Our scriptures say : देशकालवय: शनतीः संचिन्ता दण्डकर्मणि।

"The time and place of punishment as well as the age and capacity of the convict should be taken into consideration while awarding punishment."

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

offender and the gravity or otherwise of the offence committed by him. (13)

शूचीनामेकबुद्धीनां सर्वेधां सम्प्राजानात्म।

नासीत पुरे वा राष्टे वा मुशावादी नर: कवचित् ॥ 14  ॥

As a result of the ministers being all upright in their dealings, nay, of one mind and fully discerning, there was no man who told a lie anywhere in the city of Ayodhya or, for that matter, in the entire kingdom.

(14)

क्वचित्र दृष्टस्तत्रासीत् परदाररतिनरः ।

प्रशान्तं सर्वमेवासीद् राष्ट्र पुरवरं च तत् ॥ 15  ॥

Nay, there was no wicked man or one having liaison with another's wife anywhere in that kingdom. On the other hand, the whole state as well as the aforesaid city of Ayodhyā (the foremost of all cities) was perfectly tranquil (free from turmoil or tribulation). (15)

सुवासस: सुवेषाणच ते च सर्वे शुचिज्ञतः ।

हिताधशंच नरेन्द्रस्य जाग्रतो नचवछुपा ॥ 16  ॥

They were all finely dressed and well-adorned, and were of holy resolve; the welfare of the king (the state) was their sole purpose in life and they were always wide awake, seeing everything with the eyes of prudence. (16)

गुरोपुंगगृहीताश्च प्रख्याताश्च पराकमैः।

विदेशेष्विप विज्ञाता: सर्वतीं बुद्धिनिषयया: ॥ 17  ॥

Favoured of the preceptor of the king because of their numerous virtues and celebrated for their prowess, they were

universally recognized even in foreign lands, their conclusions being based on their own intellect. (17)

अभिती गुणवतनघ्च न चासन् गुणवर्जिता: ।

संधियिश्रहतस्त्वज्ञ: प्रकृत्या सम्पद्धान्विता: ॥ 18  ॥

They were qualified all round and were never devoid of virtues. They were conversant with the principles determining the propriety of peace and war and were naturally endowed with the divine properties.

(18)

मन्सर्वरणे शक्ता: शक्ता: सूक्षमासु बुद्धिषु।

नीतिशास्विशेषज्ञा: सततं प्रियवादिन: ॥ 11  ॥

They were capable of maintaining the secrecy of deliberations and further capable of subtle reasoning. They possessed a special knowledge of political science and always spoke kindly. (19)

इंदुर्गैस्तेमालैर्षर ताजा दर्शारथोजनः।

उपपत्रो मुणोपोरेत-वशासद् वसुंधराम् ॥ 20  ॥

Assisted by such qualified ministers, as mentioned above, and priests and counsellors, free from all vices*, Emperor Dáasaratha ruled over the entire globe (the Kingdom). (20)

उवेक्ष्यमाणचरोण प्रजा धर्मेण रक्ष्यन्।

प्रजानां पालनं कुर्वेत्रधर्मे परिवर्जन् ॥ 21  ॥

विश्वत्सिज्यु लोकेषु वदान्य: सत्यसंगर: ।

स तत्र पुरुषव्याप्रः शशास पृथिवीमिमम् ॥ 22  ॥

Seeing everything with his eyes in the form of spies and protecting the people

* Lord Manu says—

इक कामसमुख्याति तथायटी क्रोधजाति च । व्यसनााति दुरन्ताति प्रयन्तेन विवर्शनैत् ॥

"A monarch should scrupulously eschew the ten insurmountable vices born of lust and the eight born of anger."

The following are the ten vices born of lust :

भृगवाक्षो दिवासायण: परिवाह: विश्वये भव: । तौर्यिक्र वृथाया च कामजो उरफको गण: ॥

“Hunting, playing at dice, taking a nap during the day, slandering others, indulgence in women, inebriety, the three items of music (singing, dancing and playing upon musical instruments) and idly loitering about—these are the ten vices born of lust.”

The following eight constitute the vices born of anger :

यैर्युं सारहं उंह इंश्वसायर्विषणो । वादराजं च पारच्यं क्रोधाजीय पिणोउद्धक: ॥

“Backbiting, rashness, malice, jealousy, prying into others’ faults, unjust seizure of property, using abusive words and harsh speech—these are the eight vices born of anger.”

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

through righteousness, nay, providing maintenance for his subjects and abstaining from unrighteousness, the said tiger among men, who was munificent and true to his promise and well-known as such in all the three worlds, ruled over this earth while residing in Ayodhyā. (21-22)

नाध्यमच्छद्धिशर्चं वा तुल्यं वा शत्रुभात्म: ।

मित्रवान् नतसामन्तः प्रतापहतकपटकः ।

स शशास सगद् राजा दिवि देवपतित्थं।। 23  ॥

He never met an enemy, who could match, much less excel, him in strength, and had a number of allies; the rulers of the adjoining territories bowed to him, i.e., accepted his suzerainty and all his enemies

were got rid of by his very glory. In this way the emperor ruled over the world even as Indra, the ruler of the gods, reigns supreme in heaven. (23)

तैर्मन्धिपर्भिनहिते निविदेर्वैतोउनूरकै: कुशले: समर्थे: ।

स पार्थिवो दौमिवमाव युक्तसेजोमयेर्गोंभिरिवोदितोऊर्कः ॥ 24  ॥

Surrounded by the aforesaid counsellors, who had been charged with the act of deliberation and were devoted to the interests of the state, nay, who were clever and efficient and loyal to the king, the said monarch, Emperor Daśaratha, shone with splendour even as a rising sun shines bright when joined with its glorious rays. (24)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्मायणे वार्योकोंये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे ससम: सर्ग: ॥ 7  ॥

Thus ends Canto Seven in the Bâlakāndā of the glorious Ramāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टम: सर्ग:

Canto VIII

The king's proposal to perform a horse-sacrifice for being blessed with a son and the acclamation of the counsellors and other Brāhmanas

तत्प्र यैवंप्रभावस्य धर्मजस्य महात्मन:।

सुतार्थं तत्प्यमानस्य नासीद् वंशकर: सुतः ॥ 1  ॥

There was no son to perpetuate the line of the magnanimous King Daśaratha, whose glory has been depicted above (in the foregoing canto) and who knew what is right, even though he had been grieving for want of a son. (1)

चित्तयानस्य तस्यैवं बुद्धिरासीमहात्मनः। सुतार्थे वाजिमेधेन किमर्थे न यजाम्यहम्।। 2 ।॥

While the high-souled king was reflecting on the matter once, the following idea occurred to him: "Why not propitiate the Deity by means of a horse-sacrifice in order to be blessed with a son?" (2)

स निश्चितां मिति कृत्वा यच्छ्यमिति बुब्द्रिमान्।

मन्त्रिभि: सह धर्मात्मा सर्वैरिप कृतात्मभि: ॥ 3  ॥

ततोउब्रवीमहातेजा: सुमनं मन्निसतम।

शीघ्रमानय मे सर्वान् गुरूस्तान् सपुरोहितान् ॥ 4  ॥

Having made a firm resolve in consultation with all his counsellors of pure intellect that a sacrifice must be performed, the wise king, whose mind was devoted to righteousness and who was possessed of uncommon glory, forthwith said to Sumantra, "O jewel among ministers, please fetch speedily all my celebrated preceptors including family priests." (3-4)

ततः सुमन्त्रस्तरितं गत्वा व्रतरितबिधमः।

समानयत् स तान् सर्वान् समस्तान् बेवदपरागन् ॥ 5  ॥

Proceeding at once with quick steps,

the said Sumantra thereupon brought together

in a body the aforesaid preceptors, all of

whom had mastered the Vedas. (5)



सुयजं वामदेवं च जाबालिमथ काश्यपम्।

पुरोहितं वसिष्ठं च ये चायन्ये द्विजोत्तमाः ॥ 6  ॥

तान् पूजयित्वा धर्मात्मा राजा दशराशस्तदा ।

इदं धर्मार्थसहितं रूलक्षणं वचनमब्रवीत् ॥ 7  ॥

Treating with honour Suyajña and Vamadeva, Jābalī and Kāśyapa, the sage Vasītha, his family priest, and whoever other jewels among Brāhmanas were present there, the pious-minded King Daśaratha then spoke to them the following sweet words full of righteousness and purpose: (6-7)

मम लाल्यमानस्य सुतार्थ नास्ति वै सुखम्।

तदर्थं हयमेधेन यथ्यामीति मतिमंम ॥ 8  ॥

“Indeed there has been no joy for me, as I have been always wailing for a son all these years. In order to be blessed with a son I shall propitiate the Lord through a horse-sacrifice: such is my intention. (8) तदहं यदुपिच्छामि शास्त्रवृछेन कर्मेणा। कर्थ प्रापत्याम्हं कामं बुद्धिरत्र विचिन्त्यताम् ॥ 9  ॥

"I, therefore, wish to perform the aforesaid sacrifice according to the rites prescribed in the scriptures. How shall I be able to attain the object of my desire? A plan towards this end may kindly be devised by you." (9)

ततः साध्यिति तद्रावयं ब्राहणा: प्रत्यपुजयन्।

वसिष्ठप्रमुखा: सर्वे पार्थिवस्य मुखेरितम् ॥ 10  ॥

Thereupon all the Brāhmanas headed by the sage Vasīṣtha acclaimed the aforesaid proposal put forth by the king with his own mouth, in the words “Well conceived!” “Excellent !!” (10)

ऊच्छु प्रपमौता: सर्वे दूराशं वच:।

सध्भाग: सध्धयन्तां ते तुराग्ध विमुच्यतामु ॥ 11  ॥

Nay, highly pleased, they all tendered the following advice to Dásaratha : "The well-

known requisites for the performance of a horse-sacrifice may be got together and the horse (to be sacrificed) be released. (11)

सरव्याश्रोतर तीर यज भूमिविधीयताम्।

सर्वशा प्राप्यसे पुत्रानिभितांश पार्थिव। 1 1 2  ॥

यस्य ते थार्मिकी बुद्धिरयं पुत्रार्थभागता ।

ततस्तुष्टोभवद्र नाजा श्रुलेतद्ध द्विजभाधिनम् ॥ 13  ॥

अमावायानवदीर् नाजा हर्षैव्याकुललोचनः ।

सम्भारा: सर्धिष्यन्तां मे गुरुलगां वचनादिह ॥ 14  ॥

"Also let a sacrificial ground be prepared on the northern bank of the holy Sarayū. Through the contemplated sacrifice you will at all events get sons' desired by you, O ruler of the earth—you, to whom such a pious idea for getting a son has occurred." The king was pleased to hear the aforesaid utterance of the Brāhmanas. With eyes rolling through delight, the king then said to the ministers, "Under orders of my preceptors, let the requisite materials for the sacrifice be got ready now. (12-14)

सभाधिधिलक्षाश्र: सोपाध्यायो विमुच्छ्यात्।

सरव्याक्षोतरे तीरे यजभूमिविधीयतात् ॥ 15  ॥

"Let the sacrificial horse be released under the superintendence of (four hundred² Kṣatriya) princes capable of guarding and controlling it, along with the arch priest (who is required to pour oblations into the sacrificial fire at every stride the horse takes in the course of its wanderings over the globe).³ And let a sacrificial ground be prepared on the northern bank of the holy Sarayü. (15)⁴

शातन्यश्रापि वर्धन्तां यथाकल्पं यथाशिविध। शक्यः प्राप्तमयं व्रः: सर्वेपापि महीक्षिता ॥ 16  ॥ नापराधो भवेत् कष्टो यद्यिस्मन् कतुस्तमे। छिड्रं हि मुगायन्ते स्म विद्वासो ब्रहाराक्षसा: ॥ 17  ॥

1. This is in accordance with the popular saying: 'णटल्या बहवः पुना:' (One should covet many sons).

2. We read in the Brāhmaṇas: “ततुशगत तक्षनि वत्रस्यापातना” (For avoiding interruption in the horse-sacrifice four hundred warriors guard the horse).

3. The Brāhmaṇas further declare: 'अश्वय मेध्यस्य पदे पदे जुहोति.'

4. Verses 15 to 19 of this canto have been repeated almost verbatim in canto XII under the same numbers.

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

"Let propitiatory rites intended to avert evils be elaborately gone through in the proper order of sequence and in accordance with the scriptural ordinance. This horse-sacrifice is capable of being accomplished by any and every monarch provided there is no grievous transgression in the shape of omission of certain essential rites made in the course of this pre-eminent sacrificial performance; for Brâhmanas that have attained the form of an ogre (due to omission of Mantras and rites), though well-versed in the science of ritual acts are on the lookout for minor transgressions (in order to get an opportunity to spoil the sacrifice and thereby get the share of the gods). (16-17)

विधिधीनस्य यज्ञस्य सदा: कर्ता विनश्यति।

तद्धथा विधिपूर्वं मे कतुोपस समाप्यते ॥ 18  ॥

तथा विधानं क्रियतां समर्थः साधनैचिति।

तथेति चाबुवन् सर्वे मन्निण: प्रतिपूजिता: ॥ 19  ॥

पार्थिवेज्ञस्य तद् वाक्यं यथापूर्व निशम्य ते।

तथा चिज्ञासते धर्मज्ञा वर्धयन्तो नृपोतमम् ॥ 20  ॥

अनुज्ञातासतः सर्वे पुनर्जमनुर्थयातम्।

विसर्जीयला तान् विज्ञान् सच्चवानिदमब्रवीत् ॥ 21  ॥

ऋत्विभिर्भरपसंदिष्टो यथावत् क्रतुराप्यताम्।

इत्युक्ला नृपशार्दूल: सचिवान् समुपस्थितान् ॥ 22  ॥

विसर्जीयला स्वं वेभ्य प्राविवेश महामति:।

ततः स गला ताः पत्नीन्सेजे हृदयंगमाः ॥ 23  ॥

उवाच दीक्षां विशत यक्ष्येई सुतकारणात्।

तासां तेनातिकान्तेन वचनेन सुवर्चसाम्।

मुखपवान्यशोधन्त पवानीत हिमायये ॥ 24  ॥

"He who undertakes a sacrificial performance bereft of the prescribed procedure forthwith perishes. Therefore, steps may be taken to ensure that this sacrificial undertaking of mine is concluded in accordance with the prescribed procedure; for you are capable of doing all this." Hearing the aforesaid instructions of Daśaratha, the king of kings, in order of sequence, and treated with honour by the Emperor, all those counsellors said "Amen!" Likewise did the aforesaid Brāhmanas too, including the family and other priests, who knew what is right, said "Amen!", felicitating Daśaratha, a jewel among the kings, and, then, permitted by him, all withdrew even as they had come. Having sent away the aforesaid Brāhmanas, the emperor spoke to the ministers as follows: "Let the sacrifice recommended by the priests be duly brought to a successful conclusion." Having said so and sent away the ministers present in the assembly, the highly intelligent Daśaratha, a lion among the rulers of men, retired to his gynaeceum. Seeking his favourite consorts mentioned above, entitled as they were to participate in the sacrifice, the aforesaid monarch then said to them, "I shall perform a sacrifice for the sake of a son; be prepared to undergo consecration for the said ceremony alongwith me." At the aforesaid utterance of their husband, which was most pleasing to hear, the lotus-like faces of the glorious queens brightened like lotus flowers at the expiry of the cold season.

(18-24)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारण्डेउहम: सर्ग: ॥   ॥ ॥

Thus ends Canto Eight in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.



नवम: सर्गै:

Canto IX

A dialogue between Emperor Dasaratha and Sumantra

एतच्छुत्वा रहः सुतो राजानिमदमब्रवीत्। श्रूयतां तत् पुरावृतं पुराणो च मया श्रुतम् ॥ 1  ॥

Hearing of this intention of Emperor Dasaratha to undertake a horse-sacrifice for being blessed with a son, Sumantra, the charioteer as well as a minister of Dasaratha, spoke to the king in private as follows: "Kindly listen to a popular legend, also heard by me in the course of a Puranic exposition. (1)

अस्त्विभरुपदिष्ठोउवं पुरावृतो मया श्रुतः। सन्तकुमारो भगवान् पूर्वे कथितवान् कथाम्।। 2  ॥ क्रशपीणां संनिधी राजंस्तव पुत्राममं प्रति। काशयस्य च पुत्रोस्ति विभाण्डक इति श्रुतः ॥ 3  ॥

"This expedient in the form of a horse-sacrifice, recommended by the priests, Vasistha and others, has also been heard of by me as the theme of a legend. The omniscient sage Sanatkumāra, O king, foretold of yore an anecdote in the presence of seers in connection with the future birth of four sons to you. The narrative as told by Sanatkumāra runs as under: There is a son born to the sage Káśyapa and known by the name of Vibhandaka. (2-3)

རྟམྡསྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟད་སྟད་སྟད་སྟད་སྟད་སྟད་སྟད་སྟད་སྟད་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུ

* The primary type of Brahmacarya is the one characterized by the wearing of a girdle of Muñja grass and deerskin and living singly in the house of a teacher; while the secondary type of Brahmacarya consists in marrying a girl of one's own Varna (grade in society), after undergoing a course of training in his teacher's house, and copulating with her only during the second, fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth, twelfth, fourteenth and sixteenth nights following the menstruation, barring of course the first four nights as well as the Parva days, viz., the new moon and the full moon and the eighth and fourteenth lunar days. Says the sage Yājñavalkya :

घोड़शर्तिंगश: सीणां तस्मिन् युगमासु संविशेगत्। ब्रह्मार्यैव पर्याण्याङ्ठास्तवध् वर्जयेत्।



call together Brāhmaṇas advanced in learning and address them as follows: 'You have heard about my past actions responsible for this drought and are aware of the practices of the world. (4-10)

समादिशन्त्र नियमं प्रायश्रिंतं यथा भवेत्।

इलुक्तासे ततो राजा सर्वे ब्राह्मणसत्तमा: १११ ॥

'Kindly enjoin a course of discipline by undergoing which my sins may be atoned for.' All the aforesaid jewels among the Brāhmanas will be requested in these words by the king, Romapāda. (11)

वक्ष्यन्ति ते महीपालं ब्राह्मणा वेदपारगा:।

विभाण्डकसूतं राजन् सर्वोपायैरित्रानय ॥ 12  ॥

And the said Brāhmanas, all masters of the Vedas, will speak to the king as follows: 'Fetch her by all possible means the sage Rṣyaśrīnga, (son of Sage Vibhāṇḍaka), O king! (12)

आनाय्य तु महीपाल ऋध्यशुर्जं सुसल्कृतम्।

विभाण्डकसूर्ते राजन् ब्राह्मणं वेदपारगम्।

प्रयच्छ कन्यां शान्तां वे विन्धिना सुसमाहितः ॥ 13  ॥

“Causing Rysaśrnga, Vibhāndaka’s son a Brāhmaṇa well-versed in the Vedas, to be brought with due reverence to your capital, O ruler of the earth, give away to him in marriage your daughter, Sāntā, according to the scriptural ordinance with a devout and unquestioning mind, O monarch!” (13) तेषां तु वचनं श्रुवा राजा चितां प्रपत्स्यतः केनोपायेन चै शक्यमिहानेतुं स वीर्वेबान् ॥ 14  ॥

Hearing their suggestion, however, the king will fall a-musing as to by what means that mighty sage can be brought to his capital. (14)

ततो राजा विनिश्रिय सह मन्धिरभारसवान्।

पुरोहितममावांश प्रेथविष्यति सकृतान्। १५. ॥

Having arrived at a conclusion in consultation with his counsellors, the prudent king will then despatch his family priest and ministers to bring with honour the young

hermit with them. (15)

ते तु राजा वचः शुला व्यधिता विनतानना: । न गच्छेम ऋर्षभीता अनुनेच्यन्ति तं नृपम् ॥ 16  ॥

They will, however, be distressed to hear the king's command, and with drooping faces submit as follows: 'We are not prepared to go, afraid as we are of the Rsi Vibhāndaka, Rṣyaśrṅga's father, who was sure to curse those who would try to lure away the young hermit from his father's presence and will try to pacify the king (in order to avert his displeasure at their disobedience by assuring him that they would think out some other means of luring away the hermit and submit their proposals in that connection later). (16)

वक्ष्यस्ति चिन्तयित्वा ते तस्योपायांश्रु तान् भूमान्।

आनच्यायो वयं विप्र न च दोषो भविष्यति ॥ 11  ॥

Duly deliberating on the feasible methods of luring away Rṣyaśrāṅga from his father's hermitage, they will suggest their plan to the king and say, "We shall try to fetch the youthful Brāhmaṇa to your capital and we shall do so in such a way that no blame will attach to us." (17)

चर्मकृष्णधिपेवेर गणिकाभिश्रधेः सुतः ।

आनीतोउर्वर्षयद्वेः शनात चास्ये प्रदीयते ॥ 18  ॥

In this way (according to the suggestion of the family priest and the ministers of King Romapāda) the Rīsī's son, Rīṣyaśrīga, will be caused by Romapāda, the ruler of the Anga territory, to be brought to his own capital through courtesans, when the rain-god will cause clouds to send down rain and Sāntā (Daśaratha's daughter adopted by Romapāda) will be given in marriage to Rīṣyaśrīga. (18)

རྟམཐསྟནྡན གམག་བུམ་རྣམ ཡིག་ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོད། ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོན་ཡོན།

"And Rysaśrṇa, your son-in-law, will actually get sons for you by pouring oblations into the sacred fire. This prophecy of the



sage Sanatkumāra has been reproduced by me as aforesaid." (19)

अथ हृदी दूराशः सुमन्र प्रत्यभाषत।

यथर्थशुज्ञस्वानीतो येनेपायेन सोच्यतम् ॥ 20  ॥

Full of delight Daśaratha forthwith asked Sumantra: “It may now be pointed out to me how and by what device the sage Rīṣyaśrṇa was brought to the capital of Romapāda.” (20)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे नवम: सर्ग: ॥ 9  ॥

Thus ends Canto Nine in the Bálakāṇḍa of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

दूषाम: सर्गै:

Canto X

How the sage Rṣyaśārṇga was lured away to the capital of Romapāda and married to his adopted daughter, Śāntā

सुमन्त्रश्रौदिते राजा प्रोवाचेदं वचस्तदा।

यथर्थ्यंग्रृंस्त्वानीते येनेपायेन मन्त्रिभि: ।

तन्मे निर्गदितं सर्वं शपुणु मे मन्त्रिभि: सह ॥ 1  ॥

Urged by the king Dāśaratha, Sumantra then made the following reply: “Hear from me with your counsellors, as being exhaustively told by me, how and by what device the sage Rśyaśrṅga was brought to the capital of Romapāda by his counsellors.

(1)

रोमपादमुवार्वेर सहमात्य: पुरोहितः।

उपायो निरपायोउमस्मापिरभिवित्ति: ॥ 2  ॥

Accompanied by the ministers, the family-priest of Romapāda spoke to Romapāda as follows: “The following unfailing expedient has been carefully thought of by us: (2)

རྟམཐསྟནྡེ། བའབར་ནས:རྩལྟམལམསརྡེ། ཐནཆིནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྟེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེནྡེན།

"Living as he does in the woods and rich in askesis and study of the Vedas, Rysaśrīga is wholly unacquainted with the fair sex as well as with the objects of senses and the pleasures relating to them.

(3)

ཤྲིང་མཆེ་སྤྱི་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཁྱི་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཆེ།

དུར་མ་ལ་མི་ལ་མ་ལ་མི་ལ་མ་ལ་མ་ལ་མ་ལ་མ་ལ་མ་ལ་མ་ལ་མ་ལ་མ་ལ་མ་ལ

"We shall in no time cause him to be brought to your capital by means of pleasing objects of senses that attract the mind of men; steps may, therefore, be taken towards this end. (4)

गाणिकास्तत्र गछ्छन्तु रूपवल्य: स्वलंकृता:।

प्रलोभ्य विविधोपायोगेनोष्वन्तीह सस्तुतः ॥ 5  ॥

"Let beautifully adorned courtesans of comely appearance proceed there to the hermitage of his father. Received kindly by the youthful sage, they will lure him away to this place by recourse to diverse devices." (5)

श्रुत्वा तथेति राजा च प्रत्युवाच पुरोहितम्।

पुरोहितो मन्पणश्रु तदा चकुश्र से तथा ॥ 6  ॥

Hearing this, the king Romapāda said to the priest, “So be it!” The family priest in his turn, forthwith instructed the counsellors accordingly and the latter did as they were told, i.e., despatched the courtesans with the necessary equipment.

(6)

वारमुख्यास्तु तच्छुत्वा वर्न प्रविक्षिरुभह्नु।

आश्रमस्याविदूरोस्मिन् यतं कुर्बिति दर्शनें ॥ 9  ॥

ज्वर्षे: पुत्रस्य धीरस्य नित्यमाश्रमावासिन: ।

पितु: स नित्यसंतुष्टो नातिरिक्रकाम चाश्रमात् ॥ 6  ॥

Hearing the royal command, the

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

foremost of the courtesans of Romapada's capital entered the extensive forest and, staying not very far from the hermitage of the sage Vibhāndaka in the woodland (adjoining Śrīngaverapura, associated with the name of Rṣyaśrānga) made attempts to have a look at the Rṣi's son, who was full of self-control and always stayed in the hermitage. Ever contented with his father's affection and fostering care, he never stepped beyond the hermitage. (7-8)

न तेन जनमभूति दृष्टपूर्वै तपार्स्वना।

स्वी वा पुमान् वा यच्चान्यत सच्चं नगराख्टूजम् ॥ 9  ॥

Since his very birth that hermit boy had never before seen any man or woman or, for that matter, any other living being born in a town or in the countryside. (9)

ततः कदाचित् तं देशमाजगाम यद्छ्छय।

विभाणडकसृतसत्र ताशप्रायस्व द्वारूजना: ॥ 10  ॥

Impelled by providence one day Rṣyaśrīnga (son of Vibhaṇḍaka) came out of his hermitage to the area where the courtesans were encamping, and beheld there the aforesaid lovely women. (10)

ताश्रत्रवेधा: प्रमदा गायन्त्रो मधूरस्वरम्।

त्रशिपुत्रमुपागम्य सर्वा वचनमब्रुन्तम् ॥ 11  ॥

Singing in a melodious strain, all the aforesaid young women, who were attired in different colours, approached Rśyaśrṇa (son of Vibhaṇḍaka) and addressed to him the following question: (11)

कस्त्वं किं वर्तेस ब्रह्मज्ञातुमिच्छामहे वयम्।

एकस्त्वं विजने दूरे वने चरसि शंस नः ॥ 12  ॥

"We desire to know, O holy one, who you are and how you get on. Pray, tell us, wherefore do you roam about all alone in the remote and lonely forest?" (12)

अदृष्टकपासार्तेन काय्यरूपा वने निव्य:।

हाद्तनस्य मतिजाता आख्यातु पितरं स्वकम् ॥ 13  ॥

Women, as they were, whose form had never been seen by him before in that forest

and who were endowed with an exterior worth coveting, there appeared in him an urge, born of natural attraction, to mention the name of his father and other things too. (13)

पिता विभाण्डकोउस्माकं तस्याहं सुत औरसः ।

क्रव्यशुक्र इति ख्यात नाम कर्म च मे भुवि ॥ 14  ॥

"Vibhāndaka is the name of my father and I am his own son (sprung from his loins). My name is Rysayranga, my pursuit in the form of austerities is celebrated in this tract of land. (14)

इहाश्रमपदोउमाकों समीपे शुभदर्शनाः।

करिष्ये बोज प्रुजां वै सर्वेषां विधिपूर्वेकम् ॥ 15  ॥

"In this very forest close by there is the site of our hermitage, O lovely ones! There I shall certainly offer worship (hospitality) to you all with due ceremony." (15)

त्रहिपुत्रवचः श्रुत्वा स्वासां मतिरास वै।

तद्धासमदं इर्दुं जमयुः सर्वास्तोड़ज्ञानः ॥ 16  ॥

On hearing the reply of Rīṣyaśrīga (son of sage Vibhāndāka) there appeared in all of them a resolve to see the site of his hermitage, and all the women accordingly departed from that place to the hermitage. (16)

गतानां तु ततः पूजामृषिपुत्रश्रकार ह।

इदमध्यमिरं पाह्यमिरं मूलं फलं च नः ॥ 17 ॥

Rśyaśrṅga (son of Vibhāndaka), so the tradition goes, then offered worship (hospitality) to them even as they arrived at his hermitage, saying, “Here is water to wash your hands and there is water to wash your feet with; and here are roots and fruits offered to you by me.” (17)

प्रतिगृह्छा तु तां पूजां संवां एव समुत्सुका:।

न्हर्षेभीताश्र शीर्षे तु गमनाय मतिं दर्धु:॥ 18 ॥

Accepting the aforesaid worship hospitality, however, all of them actually made up their mind to return apace, ill at ease as they were, being afraid of the Rsi Vibhāndaka, who had gone out on some errand at that particular moment. (18)



अस्माकमपि मुख्यानि फलानीमानि है द्विज। गृहाण विष भई ते भक्ष्यस्व च माचिरम् ॥ 11  ॥

While returning, they said, “Accept, O sage, these excellent fruits offered by us too and eat them without delay, O holy one! This may do you good.” (19)

ततस्तालं समालिङ्गूव स्वां हर्षसम्पित्ताः।

मोदकान् प्रदतुस्तमे भक्ष्याश्रु विविधाश्रबुभान्। 20  ॥।

Closely embracing him and full of delight they all then gave him small round sweetmeats and various kinds of other dainty dishes to eat. (20)

तानि चास्वाद्ध तेजस्वी फलानीति सम मयते ।

अनास्वातितमूर्वांणि वने नित्यनिवासिनमा। 21  ॥

आपूच्छ्थ च तदा विषं ब्रतचर्षा निवेश्च च।

गच्छणित समापदेशाना भीतास्तस्य पितु: स्थितः ॥ 22  ॥

Even after enjoying them the glorious sage took them for fruits (alone); for they were such as had never been tasted before by those ever dwelling in the woods. Taking leave of the young Brāhmaṇa and telling him of some sacred observance to be gone through by them, those women then departed under that pretext, afraid as they were of his father. (21-22)

गतासु तासु सर्वासु काश्यपस्यात्मजो हिज:।

अस्वस्थद्वयशासीद् दु:खाच्च परिवर्ते ॥ 23  ॥

When they had all left, the Brāhmana, Rṣyaśrīga, sprung from the loins of Vibhāndaka (a scion of the sage Kaśyapa), felt uneasy at heart and was restless through agony. (23)

ततो3परेड्युतं देरुभागजगम स वीर्वयान्।

विशण्डकस्तुः श्रीमान् मनसा चित्तवम्यूडुः ॥ 24  ॥

मनोजा यत्र ता दृष्टा वारमुखा: स्वलंकृताः ।

दुईय च ततो विषमायान्तं हृटयानसाः ॥ 25  ॥

उपसून्य ततः सर्वीतास्तमूचुरिंदं वचः ।

एह्ञा श्रभपदं सौम्य असमाकमिति चाब्बून ॥ 26  ॥

Thinking of them in his mind again and again, that powerful and glorious sage

Rśyaśrīga (son of Vibhāndaka) departed from that place the following day to that area where those charming courtesans had been seen by him beautifully adorned the previous day. Going forth to meet him with a delighted mind the moment they saw the sage coming from his hermitage, they all then addressed to him the following request: "Just pay a visit to our hermitage, O gentle one!" and further spoke as follows: (24-26)

चित्राणयत्र बहुति स्युर्म्तानि च फलानि च।

ततायोय विशोधेण विधिर्हि भविता शूवम।। 27 ।।

“Although roots and fruits of various kinds may be had in abundance here, this process of entertainment will surely be gone through there in our hermitage in a special degree even as compared to this place”.

(27)

श्रुत्वा तु वचनं तासां सर्वांसां हृदयंगमम्।

गमनाय मर्ति चक्रे तं च निव्युस्तथा स्थितः ॥ 28  ॥

Hearing the prayer of them all, which was so captivating to the heart, he made up his mind to go with them and the women took him to the capital of King Romapāda in that manner in a boat on the holy Gargā. (28)

तत्र चानीयामने तु विधे तस्मिन् महात्यिन्।

ववर्षे सहसा देवो जगत प्रहादार्यस्तदा ॥ 29  ॥

Even while the high-souled Brāhmaṇa was being escorted there to the Anga territory, the god of rain sent down a shower all of a sudden at that very time, bringing great joy to all of them. (29)

वर्षेणैवागत विप्रं तापसं स नराधिः ।

प्रत्युद्रम्य मुर्नि प्रहः शिरसा च महीं गत: ॥ 30  ॥

Going forth to meet the ascetic Brāhmaṇa, who had arrived in his kingdom synchronously with the rain, the said ruler of men bowed low to the sage and touched the ground with his head. (30)

अर्थं च प्रदूर्ते तस्मै न्यायतः सुसमाहितः ।

वरे प्रसादं विप्रेन्नाना विमं मन्युराविशेत् ॥ 31  ॥

Fully composed in mind he offered him



with due ceremony water to wash his hands with and begged of that prince among Brāhmanas a boon to the effect that no wrath might enter the mind of the sage or his father for his having caused the sage to be lured away to his kingdom from his father's hermitage. (31)

अन्त:पुरं प्रवेश्यमै कन्यां दत्ता यथाविधि।

शान्तां शान्तेन मनसा राजा हर्षमवाप सः ॥ 32  ॥

Having ushered him into the gynaecum

जूलायैं श्रीमदामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे दर्शम: सर्ग: ॥ 10  ॥

Thus ends Canto Ten in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

एकादशः सर्गः

Canto XI

Urged by Sumantra, Emperor Dasaratha calls on his friend, King Romapāda, and brings with the latter's permission Śāntā and Rṣyaśrīnga to his own palace

भूय एव हि राजेन्द्र शणु मे वचनं हितम्।

यथा स देवप्रवर: कथयामास बुद्धिमान्।। 1 ।।

Further hear from me, O king of kings, the wholesome words which the aforesaid wise seer, the foremost of all heavenly beings, was actually pleased to utter: (1) इक्ष्वाकृष्णां कुले जातो भविष्यति सुधार्यमिकः।

नामा दारशेथे राजा श्रीमान् सत्यप्रतिश्व: ॥ 2  ॥

"In the line of the Ikswākus will be born a highly pious and glorious king, Dāsaratha by name, who will be true to his promise.

(2)

अज्ञानेन सख्यं च तस्य राजो भविष्यति ।

कन्या चायस्य महाभागा शान्ता नाम भविष्यति ॥ 3  ॥

"Friedship will be developed by the said monarch with the ruler of the Angas. And the latter will have a highly blessed daughter, Śānta by name (given in adoption to him by Daśaratha). (3)

पुरस्वज्ञस्य रास्तु रोमपाद इति श्रुतः ।

तं स राजा दर्शरणो गमिष्यति महायशना: ॥ 4  ॥

"The ruler of the Angas (the son of King Anga) will be known by the name of Romapāda. Possessed of great renown, the said King Daśaratha will approach the latter with the following request: (4)

अनपत्योउसि धर्मात्मज्ञानाभर्ति मम कतुम्।

आहरेत त्वयाउज्ञ: संतानार्थ कुलतस्य च।। 5 ।।

'Since I am without a male issue, O king whose mind is given to piety, let the sage Rysaśrīga, the husband of Śantā, when permitted by you, perform a sacrifice for the propagation of my race'. (5)

श्रुत्वा राजोउध तद् वाक्यं मनसा से विधिन्वल्पा।

प्रदास्यते पुरावन्तं शान्ताभतारमात्वमवान्। ६, १।।

"Hearing the aforesaid request of the emperor and revolving it in his mind, and resolving to comply with it, the noble-minded



Romapāda will instantly part with the sage Rīṣyaśrīṇa (the husband of Śanta), already blessed with a son. (6)

प्रतिगृहं च तं विषं स राज्ञ विगतब्बर:। आहरिष्यति तं यज्ञ प्रह्छेनान्तरात्मा ॥ 9  ॥

"Taking with him the said Brāhmaṇa, Rīṣyaśrīṇa, and rid of his agony by securing his very presence, the celebrated monarch Daśaratha will perform with his help and guidance the aforementioned sacrifice for being blessed with a son, with his inner mind highly gratified. (7)

तं च राजा दशरणे यशस्कामः कृताजलिं:।

त्रव्यश्रूई द्विजश्छे वरियंघित धर्मपित्त।। 8 ।।।

यजार्थं प्रसवार्थं च स्वर्गार्थं च नरेश्रः।

लभते च स तं कामं द्विजमुखाद्व विशाम्पति:। 9 ।।

"Nay, desirous of fame, King Dasáratha, the ruler of men, who knows what is right will request Rśyaśrṅga, the foremost among the Brahmanas, with folded hands to officiate as a priest for conducting the sacrifice, for obtaining a male progeny and securing an abode in heaven through a son. And through that jewel among the Brāhmanas, King Dasáratha, the ruler of the people, will get that desired object. (8-9)

पूराश्राय सचिव्यन्ति चत्वारोभितविक्रः। वंशप्रतिच्छानकरा: सर्वभूतेषु विश्रुता: ॥ 10  ॥

"And as a result of that sacrifice there will be born to him as many as four sons possessed of immense prowess, and well-known among all created beings, who will bring honour to their lineage." (10)

एवं स देवप्रवर: पूर्व कथितवान् कथान्। सन्तकुमारो भगवान् पुरा देवयुगे प्रभुः ॥ 11  ॥

So did that omniscient and powerful sage Santakumāra, the foremost among heavenly beings, utter of yore a prophecy in the Satyayuga, preceding the current round of four Yugas. (11)

स त्व पुरुषशादूल समात्य सुसक्ततम्।

स्वयमेव महाराज गत्वा सबलवाहन: ॥ 12  ॥

"As such, keen as you are to obtain a male progeny, O tiger among men, bring you the sage, highly honoured, with due ceremony, going personally to escort him with a detachment of your troops and animals and vehicles used for conveying men, O great king!" (12)

सुमन्त्रस्य वचः श्रुत्वा हृष्टो दशरथो3पवत्।

अनुमान्य वसित्वं च सुतत्वाक्यं निशाम्य च ॥ 13  ॥

सात:पुरः सहामान्यः प्रययौ यत्र स द्विजः।

वनानि सरितश्चैव व्यतिकम्य शनैः शनैः ॥ 14  ॥

अधिचक्राम तं देशं यत्र वै सुत्निपुरावः ।

आसाघ तं द्विजश्रंठे रोमपादस्मीपगम् ॥ 15  ॥

ऋषिपुर्जं ददर्शाशी दीय्यमानमिवानलम् ।

ततो राजा यथायोग्यं पूजां चढ़ क्रिशेषतः ॥ 16  ॥

सखिल्वात् तस्य वै राजः प्रह्छेन्तारतात्मना ।

रोमपादेन चाख्यातनूपिपुत्राय धीमते ॥ 17  ॥

सख्यं सम्बन्धकं चैव तदा तं प्रत्यपूजयत् ।

एवं सुस्कृततरने सहोषित्वा नरर्षभः ॥ 18  ॥

ससाध्विदवसान् राजा राजानमिदमब्रवीत्।

शान्ता तव सुता राजन् सह भर्जा विश्राम्पते ॥ 19  ॥

मदीयं नगरं यातु कार्यं हि महदुचताम्।

तथेति राजा संश्रून्य गमनं तस्य धीमतः ॥ 20  ॥

उवाच वचनं विधं गच्छ त्वं सह भार्याया।

त्रधिपुत्र: प्रतिश्रूल तथेल्याह नृपं तदा ॥ 21  ॥

Dásaratha was rejoiced to hear the advice of Sumantra; nay, having conveyed the opinion of the charioteer to Vasiṭṭha and on securing his consent, king Dásaratha proceeded with the queens (the inmates of his gynaecum) as well as with his ministers to the place where that Brāhmaṇa was—passing through forests and crossing streams, he gradually reached that land where Rīṣayásṛṇa, the foremost among the sages, actually lived. Reaching that place, he forthwith saw the son of Vibhāndaka, the foremost among the Brāhmanas, resplendent as fire and seated near Romapāda. With an extremely delighted mind the king (Romapāda) thereupon offered worship in order of seniority to the emperor as well as to those who

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

accompanied him with particular reverence because of the emperor being his esteemed friend. By Romapāda was made known to the enlightened Rīṣayārṇa (the son of Vibhāndaka) his friendship with the emperor as well as the relation in which the emperor stood to the sage (being the real father of his wife, Śāntā) as also how Śāntā was given in adoption by the emperor to Romapāda, who was is弱小, at the latter's request; thereupon Rīṣayārṇa honoured the emperor in return for the latter's salutations. Greatly honoured in this way by Romapāda and having stayed with him for seven or eight days, the emperor, the foremost among men, spoke to the king as follows: "Let your daughter, Śāntā, O king, proceed along with her husband to my capital, O ruler of the people, since there is a great undertaking on foot there." Having promised the visit of that wise man, Rīṣayārṇa, with the words "Amen!", the king addressed the following request to the Brāhmaṇa: "Proceed you to Ayodhyā with your wife!" Hearing this, Rīṣayārṇa (the son of Vibhāndaka) said to the king at once, "So be it!" (13-21)

स नृपेणाध्यन्त्रात: प्रययी सह भार्येला।

तावव्योन्याझलिं कृत्वा सेहाहसशिलध्य चोरसा ॥ 22  ॥

ननन्दतुदैशगशो रोमपादशु वीर्येवान्।

ततः सुहृदमापृछ्ण प्रस्थितो सुर्नन्दन: ॥ 23  ॥

Thus permitted by the king, he left with his wife for Ayodhyā. Greeting with joined palms and clasping each other to their bosom out of affection, the mighty Dáśaratha and Romapāda both rejoiced. Taking leave of his friend, Dáśaratha, a scion of Raghu, then departed for his capital. (22-23)

पौरिषु प्रेष्यामास दुतान् वे शीप्रायामिन:।

क्रियतां नगरं सर्वे क्षिप्रमेव स्वलंकृतम् ॥ 24  ॥

धूपितं सिकसम्पूर्ट पताकाधिपलंकृतम्।

ततः प्रह्धा: पौरास्ते श्रुला राजानमागतम् ॥ 25  ॥

तथा चकूश तत् सर्वे राजा यत् प्रेषितं द्वत।

ततः स्वलंकृतं राजा नगरं प्रविवेश हा ॥ 26  ॥

श्रबुद्धिपनिरहृदि: पुरस्कृत्ता द्विजर्षभम्।

ततः प्रमुदिता: सर्वे दृष्टा वे नागरा द्विजम् ॥ 27  ॥

प्रवेश्यमानं सल्कृत्य नरेन्द्रोगेन्द्रकर्मणा।

यथा दिवि सुरेन्द्रण सहस्वाक्षेण काश्ययम् ॥ 28  ॥

While doing so he despatched in advance swift-footed messengers with the following instructions to the citizens of Ayodhyā : "Let the whole city be tastefully decorated at once, nay, sprinkled with water and then dusted, fumigated with incense and adorned with buntings." Overjoyed to hear of the king having well-nigh arrived, the aforesaid citizens thereupon did at once all that precisely as had been desired by the king. Placing Rśyaśrīnga, the foremost of the Brāhmanas ahead, the king then entered the well-decorated city in the midst of blasts of conches and the beating of kettle-drums; so the tradition goes. All the citizens were really much delighted at that time to see the Brāhmana (Rśyaśrīnga) being treated with respect and ushered into the city by the king, who had rendered help to Indra in his campaign against the demons—even as Lord Vamana (son of the sage Kaśyapa) was ushered into paradise by the thousand-eyed Indra, the ruler of the gods.

(24-28)

अन्त:पुरं प्रवेश्येनं पूजां कृत्वा च शाखतः ।

कृतकृष्टि नदार्डजमानं मेने तस्यायवाहन्ता। 21  ॥

Having introduced the sage into the gynaeceum and offered him worship according to the scriptural ordinance, Dáśaratha thought himself at that time as one whose object in life had been accomplished, by escorting him to his palace. (29)

अन्तःपुराणि सर्वाणि शान्तां दृष्टा तथागताम्।

सह भर्ना विशालात्यों प्रीत्यानन्दमुपागमन् ॥ 30  ॥

Seeing the large-eyed Śānta come with her husband in that state with a babe, all the queens experienced great joy through love. (30)

पूर्यमाना तु ताधिः सा राजा चैव विशेषतः ।

उवास तत्र सुविता कंचित् कालं सहद्धिजा ॥ 31  ॥



Being treated with honour by them and particularly by the king himself, she lived

there happily for some time alongwith her husband and babe. (31)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंये आदिकाज्ये बालकाण्डे एकादशः सर्प: ॥ 11  ॥

Thus ends Canto Eleven in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

द्वादश: सर्पी:

Canto XII

Emperor Dáasaratha gives his consent to the performance of a horse-sacrifice for being blessed with a son

ततः काले बहुतिथे कर्मेमश्रित् सुमनोहरे।

वसने समनुप्रासे राजो यटुं मनोरुभवत् ॥ 1  ॥

Afterwards, when a considerable time had elapsed since the arrival of Rṣyaśārīga, and an unusually charming spring set in, an urge was felt by the Emperor to undertake a sacrifice for being blessed with a son. (1)

ततः प्रणय शिरसा तं विषं देववर्षिनम्।

यजाय वरयामास संतानार्थ कुलस्य च ॥ 2  ॥

Touching the ground with his head he sought the help of the aforesaid Brāhmaṇa, Rṣyaśrīga, who possessed the splendour of a god, for conducting a sacrifice with a view to the propagation of his race as well as to the attainment of heaven. (2)

तथेति च स राजानुवाच वसुधाधियम्।

सभारा: सध्धियन्तों ते तुरग्रश विमूच्यन्ता।। 3  ॥

सर्यवाश्रोने तीरे यज्भूमिवर्धियात्।

ततोउत्रवीन्प्यो वाक्यं ब्राह्मणान् वेदवपाराण।। 4  ॥

सुमन्वावाहय क्षिपमुलिजो ब्रह्मावादिन: ।

सुयजं वामदेवं च जाबालिमध्य काशयम् ॥। 5  ॥

पुरोहितं वसिधं च ये चान्ये हिज्ञसन्तमः ।

ततः सुमन्वस्वरितं गत्वा त्वरितविक्रमः ॥ 6  ॥

समानयत् स तान् सर्वान् समसतान् बेदवागरान् ।

तान् पूजयित्वा धर्मात्मा राजा दर्शगर्धसन्तदा ॥ 7  ॥

धर्मार्थसिति वृक्ते रूर्णक्षणं वचनमब्रवीत् ।

मम तात्ययानस्य पूत्रार्थ नास्ति वे सुखम् ॥ 8  ॥

The sage accordingly said to the king, who ruled over the entire globe, “Requisites for the sacrifice may be got ready and your horse let loose. And let a sacrificial ground be prepared on the northern bank of the Sarayū.” The king then spoke to Sumantra as follows: “Sumantra, speedily call Brāhmanas who are masters of the Vedas and priests who are capable of expounding the Vedas, viz., Suyajña and Vamadeva, Jābāli and Káśyapa, Vasiṣtha, my family priest, and whoever other jewels among Brāhmanas there may be. Proceeding hastily, the celebrated Sumantra, who walked with quick paces, brought together in a body the aforesaid Brāhmanas, who were all masters of the Vedas. Receiving them with reverence, King Dásaratha, whose mind was given to piety, then addressed to them the following words, which were reasonable and sweet and full of piety and purpose: “Really there is no joy to me, who have been suffering great agony for want of a son all these years. (3-8)

पूजार्थं हयमेधेन व्यथमातीत मतिमंम।

तदहं ययूट्थिज्ञता हयमेधेन कर्मणा ॥ 1  ॥

“I shall accordingly propitiate the Lord with a horse-sacrifice: such is my resolve. I, therefore, intend to worship God through a sacrificial performance called Aśwamedha (a horse-sacrifice). (9)

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

རྟོགས་ཀྱིན་ཀྱིན་ཀྱིན་ཀྱིན་ཀྱིན་ཀྱིན་ཀྱྱིན་ཀྱིན་ཀྱྱིན་ཀྱྱིན་ཀྱྱིན་ཀྱྱིན་ཀྱྱིན་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིན་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིན་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིན་ཀརྡམ་ཀྱིན་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིན་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིན་བཅས་ཀྱིན་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིན་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིན་ཁྱིན་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིན་ཁྱིན་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིད་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིད་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིད་ཀརྣམ་བཅས་ཀྱིད་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིད་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིད་ཁྱིན་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིད་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིད་ཁྱིན་ཁརྣམ་ཀྱིད་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིད་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱིད་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱོད་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱོད་ཀརྣམ་ཀྱོད་ཀརྣམཀྱོད་ཀརྣམཀྱོད་ཀརྣམཀྱོད་ཀརྷམཀྱོད་ཀརྣམཀྱོད་ཀརྣམཀྱོད་ཀརལམཀྱོད་ཀརྣམཀྱོད་ཀརྣམཀྱོད་ཀདྲམཀྱོད་ཀདྲམཀྱོད་ཀདྲམཀྱོད་ཀདྱམཀྱོད་ཀདྲམཀྱོད་ཀདྲམཀྱོད་ཀད་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཆན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་ཅན་

"And I shall certainly attain all my desired ends through the influence (spiritual power) of Rṣyaśrṇa." Thereupon, saying "Amen!" all the Brahmanas with Vasiṣṭha as their leader acclaimed the aforesaid proposal that had emanated from the lips of the king. And those headed by Rṣyaśrṇa then replied to the king as follows: (10-11)

सभारा: सभिध्यन्तों ते तुरगँध विमुच्यन्ता।

सर्याङ्ठीते तीर यजभूमिविधीयताम्। 12 ।॥

"Let all the requisites for the sacrifice be got together and your horse be released and let a sacrificial ground be prepared on the northern bank of the Sarayū. (12)

सर्वथा प्राप्यसे पुर्जांशुतोरो प्रमतविक्रमान्।

यस्य ते धार्मिकी बुद्धिरियं पुत्राध्यमाता॥ 13 ॥

"You, to whom such a pious idea has occurred for securing a son, shall at all events secure four sons possessed of immense prowess." (13)

ततः प्रीतो3पवद्र राजा श्रुत्वा तु द्विजभाषितम्।

अमावानत्रबवीद्र राजा हर्षेणेदं शुभाश्रमम् ॥ 14 ॥

The king was really pleased to hear the acclamation of the Brāhmanas. The monarch then joyfully spoke to the ministers in sweet words as follows: (14)

गूल्णां वचनाख्छीघं सम्भायार: सध्धियन्त् मे।

समर्थाधितिजतश्रशः सोपाध्यायो विमुचताम् ॥ 15  ॥

"Let the requisites for the sacrifice be got together apace according to the instructions of my elders. And let the sacrificial horse be let loose under the superintendence of four hundred Kṣatriya princes capable of guarding and controlling it, along with the chief-priest. (15)

सर्यक्षणचोर तौर यज्ञभूमिविंधीयात्मा।

शानतयश्चापिभवर्धन्तां यथाकल्यं यथाविधि ॥ 16  ॥

“Nay, let a sacrificial ground be prepared on the northern bank of the Sarayū and let propitiatory rites (intended to avert evils) be elaborately gone through in proper order of sequence and in accordance with the scriptural ordinance. (16)

शक्यः कर्तूमयं यज्ञः सर्वेणापि महीक्षिता।

नायराधो भवेत् कष्टो यद्यमिन् कतुसतमे ॥ 17  ॥

"This horse-sacrifice is capable of being accomplished by any and every monarch provided there is no grievous transgression (in the shape of omission of certain essential rites) made in the course of this pre-eminent sacrificial performance. (17)

छिन्हे हि मुगवन्त्ये तिद्धांसे ब्रह्मारक्षासः।

विधिहीनस्य यज्ञस्य सहः कर्गा विनर्गयति ॥ 18  ॥

"For Brahmanas that have attained the form of an ogre due to the omission of Mantras and rites, though learned (well-versed in the science of ritual acts) are on the look-out even for a minor transgression (in order to get an opportunity to spoil the sacrifice and thereby get the share of the gods) and he who undertakes a sacrificial performance bereft of the prescribed procedure forthwith perishes. (18)

तद् यथा विधिपूर्वं मे कतूरेष समाप्यते।

तथा विधानं क्रियतां समर्थः करणेचिह् ॥ 19  ॥

"Theforee steps may be taken to ensure that this sacrificial undertaking of mine is concluded in accordance with the prescribed procedure; for you are capable of doing all this." (19)

तथेति च ततः सर्वे मन्धिप्र: प्रत्यपूजयन्।

पार्थिवेन्न्य स्त दावयं यथा3प्रजममकुक्तेि ॥ 20  ॥

Thereupon all the counsellors of the king acclaimed the aforesaid command of the Emperor with the words “Let it be so”, and did as they were enjoined to do. (20)

तते दिजासे धर्ममस्तुवन् पार्थिवर्षभम्।

अनुज्ञातस्ततः सर्वे पुनर्जम्पुर्यश्रतामम् ॥ 21  ॥

Those Brahmanas next glorified the Emperor, who knew what was right. Then,

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

being permitted by the Emperor, all returned as they had come. (21)

गतेषु तेषु विषेषु मन्वणरतान् नराधिप:।

विसर्जित्वा स्वं वेक्ष प्रविशेष महामाति: ॥ 22  ॥

Sending away the said counsellors when those Brāhmanās had dispersed, the highly intelligent monarch entered his gynaecum. (22)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमहमायणे वार्मकीये आदिकाल्ये बालकाण्डे द्वादश: सर्ग: ॥ 12  ॥

Thus ends Canto Twelve in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Ṣsi and the oldest epic.

त्रयोदर्श: सर्गैः

Canto XIII

Feudatory chiefs called under orders of the Emperor and charged with the duty of setting up stables etc.

पुन: प्रासे वसने तु पूर्ण: संवससोउभवत्।

प्रसवार्थं गतो यट्डू हयमेधेन वीर्वयान्। 1 1  ॥

The vernal season having appeared again, one year* got completed and the powerful monarch Dásaratha called on Visiṣṭha with a view to commencing the horse-sacrifice for the sake of a male progeny. (1)

अधिवादा वसिष्ठं च न्यायतः प्रतिपूर्ण च।

अज्ववीत् प्रश्रितं वाक्यं प्रसवार्थं द्विज्ञात्मम् ॥ 2  ॥

Having greeted Vasistha and his wife, Arundhati, and offering homage to them according to the scriptural ordinance, he addressed the following humble prayer to Vasistha, the foremost of the Brāhmanas, with the object of obtaining a son: (2)

यज्ञे मे क्रियतां बझान् यथोक्ते मुनिपुरांव।

यथा न विशना: क्रियने यज्ञेचु विधीयाताम || ३ ॥

"Let the sacrifice intended to be performed by me, O holy one, be commenced as enjoined by the scriptures, O jewel among sages, and steps may be taken to ensure that no obstacles may be thrown by the ogres etc., in the way of items forming part of the sacrifice. (3)

भवान् सिन्धः सुह्ममहं गुरुर्व परमो महान्।

चोकद्यो भवता चैव भागे यजस्य चोघता: ॥ 4  ॥

"You are my selfless well-wisher as well as my supreme preceptor and an exalted soul too. The whole burden of the sacrifice that has come to me is to be borne by you alone." (4)

तथेति च स राजानमब्रवीद् द्विजसतम: ।

करिष्ये सर्वमेवैतद् भवता यत् समर्थितम् ॥ 5  ॥

"Amen!" said that jewel among the Brahmanas to the emperor, and added, "I shall undoubtedly do all that, which has been sought for by you." (5)

ततोउब्रबीद् द्विजान् वृक्रद्धान् यत्रकर्मेसुनिश्छितान्।

स्थापत्ये निश्छितार्शेव वृक्रद्धान् परमधार्मिकान् ॥ 6  ॥

कर्मार्चिताक्राश्ल्यकारान् वर्धक्रीत् खनकानपि।

गणाक्राश्ल्यनिर्भयेच तर्नवतर्नकान् ॥ 7  ॥

तथा शूर्यीशास्त्रविवर: पुरुषान् सुखहुधूनान्।

यजकर्मे समीहन्तां भवन्तो राजशासनान् ॥ 8  ॥

The sage Vasistha then spoke to elderly Brāhmanas well-versed in ritual acts as well as to elderly and most pious Brāhmanas, skilled in architecture relating to sacrifices, as also to servants engaged for the whole

* In the Kalpa-Sūtras we read : ‘संवलताने दीक्षेत’ (One should consecrate oneself for a horse-sacrifice at the end of a year (after the letting loose of the sacrificial horse).

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

sacrificial session, artists, carpenters, those entrusted with the work of digging the sacrificial pits, astronomers and artisans, nay, even to actors and dancers and likewise to pure-minded men well-versed in sacred lore and to those whose knowledge extended over a very wide range of subjects: "Undertake you your respective duties connected with the sacrifice under orders of His Majesty. (6-8)

इच्छ्मा बहुसाहसी शीप्रमानीयतामिति।

उपकायार्थ: क्रियन्तां च राज्ञो बहुगुणान्विता: ॥ 9  ॥

"Let bricks be speedily brought in many thousands and palaces befitting a monarch and equipped with many articles of food and drink etc., built. (9)

ब्राह्णावस्वाधुरचे कर्तेब्य: शतश: शुभा: । भध्यायरपानैबहुभिभः समुपेताः सुनिश्चिता: ॥ 10  ॥

"And good houses for the Brāhmanas, strongly built and well provided with manifold edibles (such as fruits) and articles of food and drink be provided in abundance. (10) तथा पौरजनस्यापि कर्तव्याश्र सुविस्ताः। अगतानां सुदूराच्य पार्थवानां पृथक् पृथक् ॥ 11  ॥

"Similarly, spacious dwellings and wells etc., should be constructed for the citizens too and mansions should be built separately for feudatory princes expected to arrive from long distances. (11)

वाजिवरणशगताश्र तथा श्यागृहाणि च। भटानां महदावासा वैदेशिकनिवासिनम् ॥ 12  ॥

“Similarly, stables should be erected for the horses and stalls for the elephants of royal visitors and dormitories for the public and big houses for warriors belonging to other states as well as for those of our own territory. (12)

आवासा बहुभध्या वै सर्वकामैरूपस्थिता:।

तथा पौराजनस्यापि जनस्य बहुशोभनम् ॥ 13  ॥

दातव्यमत्र विधिवत् सत्कृस्य न तु लीलाया।

सर्वे वर्गा यथा पूजां प्राप्नवन्ति सुसत्कृता: ॥ 14  ॥

"The houses should all be provided with abundant edibles and equipped with all desired objects and excellent food should be provided to the citizens as well as to those hailling from the countryside, respectfully in accordance with the scriptural ordinance, but never in a wanton way, so that members of all the grades of society may receive hospitality with due honour. (13-14)

न चावज्ञा प्रयोक्त्वा कामकोधिशगदापि ।

यजकर्मसु ये व्यया: पुरुषा: श्रल्पिनस्तथा ॥ 15  ॥

तेषामपि विशेषेण पूजा कायां यथाकमम् ।

ये स्यु: सम्पूजिता: सवे वसुर्पिभौजनेच च ॥ 16  ॥

यथा सर्वे सुविहितं न किंचित् परिहीयते ।

तथा भवन्तः कुर्वन्तु प्रीतियुक्तेन चेतसा ॥ 17  ॥

"And no disrespect should be shown to anyone even under the impulse of passion and anger. Nay, hospitality should be shown in a special degree in order of seniority to those men and artisans who may remain engrossed with their duties connected with the sacrifice. See that everything connected with all those who are duly honoured with riches (gifts of money) and food is fully accomplished and nothing remains undone. Therefore, with a mind full of love, act you all in such a way as to ensure this."

(15-17)

ततः सर्वे समाग्य वसिष्ठमिदमबुवन्।

यथेचंट तत् सुविहितं न किंचित् परिहोयते ॥ 18  ॥

Approaching Vasistha, they all thereupon spoke to him as follows: “Everything will be duly executed as desired by you; nothing will remain undone. (18)

यथोक्ते तत् करिष्यामो न किंचित् परिहास्यते ।

ततः सुमन्त्रमाह्य वसिष्ठे वाक्यमब्रवीत् ॥ 9  ॥

"We shall do it as enjoined by you and nothing will be wanting." Summoning Sumantra, Vasistha then spoke to him as follows: (19)

निम्बन्यस्य नृपतीन् पृथिव्यों चे च धार्मिकाः ।

ब्राह्णगान् कृशियान् वैश्याअ्यूत्रश्चेव सहस्णः ॥ 20  ॥

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

"Invite kings, nay, whoever on earth are pious, as well as Brâhmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaiśyas and Śūdras in thousands. (20)

समानयस सलृत्य सर्वदेशेषु मानवान्।

प्रिथिलाप्यति शूरं जनकं सत्यवादिन्॥ 21  ॥

तमानय महाभागं स्वयमेव सुसलृकतम्।

पूर्वे सर्वश्चिनं जाता ततः पूर्वे ब्रवीमि ते ॥ 22  ॥

"Bring together men (other than those specified in the foregoing verse) from all lands, treating them with honour. Nay, bring yourself with great respect from Mithilā the celebrated and highly blessed Janaka, the heroic and truthful king of Mithilā, first of all. I make this suggestion to you, knowing him to be a predetermined relation of the Emperor, as the prospective father-in-law of his sons. (21-22)

तथा काशिपति सिग्धं सततं प्रियवातिन्।

सदवूर्नं देवसंकाशं स्वयमेवानयस्य ह२। 33 ॥

"Also bring personally the friendly and god-like ruler of the kingdom of Kaši, who ever speaks kindly, they say, and possesses a noble character. (23)

तथा केकयराजानं वृद्धं परमधार्मिकम्।

श्रूरं राजसिंहस्य सपूत्रं तिम्हानय ॥ 24  ॥

"Similarly, bring here the celebrated and extremely pious king of the Kekayas, the aged father-in-law of Daśaratha, a very lion among kings, as well as his son. (24)

अङ्ग्रे श्रं महैवासं रोमपादं सुसक्तम्।

वयस्यं राजसिंहस्य सपूत्रं तिम्हानय ॥ 25  ॥

"Also bring here with great respect King Romapāda, the ruler of the Angas, a well-known friend of our lion-like sovereign and the wielder of a mighty bow, alongwith his son. (25)

तथा कोसलराजानं भानुमन्ते सुसक्तम्।

मगधाधिपति शूरं सर्वशास्विशारादम् ॥ 26  ॥

प्रासिंत परमोदारं सक्तृत पुरुषर्षभम्।

राजः शगसनादाय चोदयस्त पूर्णर्षभम्।

प्राचीनान् सिस्युसौवीरान् सौराष्ट्रेशंत्र प्राप्थिन्न।   ॥ २७ ॥

"Likewise, bring most respectfully Bhanumān, the king of Kosala, and with due honour Prāptijña, the heroic and supremely large-hearted ruler of Magadha, the foremost among men and well-versed in all sacred lore. Taking the orders of His Majesty, invite the eminent rulers of the eastern territories as well as the monarchs of the Sindhusauvira and Saurāstra. (26-27)

दाक्षिणाल्यान् नरेन्ड्रश्र समस्तानानयस्व ह।

सन्ति क्रिन्थाश्रु ये चान्ये राजान: पृथिवीतले ॥ 28  ॥

तानायन यथा क्षिपं सानुगान् सहबान्यबान् ।

एतान् दूतैमंहाभागैरानयस्व नृपाज्ञा ॥ 29  ॥

“Further bring all the rulers of the south and duly get together apace whatever other friendly monarchs there are on the surface of the earth, along with their followers and relations, get these through highly distinguished ambassadors under orders of His Majesty.” (28-29)

वसिष्ठवाक्यं तच्छूला सुमन्त्रस्वरितं तदा।

व्यादिशत् पुरुषांसत्न राजामानयने शुभान् ॥ 30  ॥

Hearing the aforementioned command of Vasiṣtha on that occasion, Sumantra hastily charged capable men with the aforesaid duty of bringing monarchs. (30)

स्वयमेव हि धर्मात्मा प्रयातो मुनिशासनात्।

सुमन्रस्वलिती भूला समानेतु महामतिः ॥ 31  ॥

Nay, under orders of the sage the highly intelligent Sumantra, whose mind was given to piety, personally departed with haste to bring with honour those who had been specially marked out by Vasiṣṭha for being brought personally by Sumantra. (31)

ते च कर्मान्तिकाः सर्वे विस्णव्य महर्षे।

सर्वे निवद्यन्ति सम यद्य यदुपकालिन्तम् ॥ 32  ॥

Nay, all those who had been employed to work for the sacrifice till the end reported to the eminent sage, Vasiṣṭha, whatever had been accomplished in connection with the sacrifice. (32)



ततः प्रीते हिजश्छितान् सर्वान् मुनिरब्रवीत्।

अवज्ञा न दातव्यं कस्यचिल्लीलयापि वा ॥ 33  ॥

Pleased with their report, the sage Vasiṣṭha, the foremost of the Brāhmanas, then said to them all, “No gift should be made to anyone with disrespect or even with irreverence. (33)

अवज्ञा कृतं हन्याद् दातारं नात्र संशय:।

ततः कैश्रिकारोत्रैकरपयाता महौश्रितः ॥ 34  ॥

बहूनि रलान्यादाय राजो दूराशयस्य ह।

ततो वसिष्ठः सुप्रीते राजानमिदमब्रबित् ॥ 35  ॥

"A gift made with contumely brings ruin to the donor: there is no doubt about it." Some days after the departure of Sumantra and others a number of kings arrived with many valuable presents in the form of jewels, pearls, articles of wearing apparel, ornaments etc., for Emperor Dasaratha: so the tradition goes. Highly pleased at their arrival, Vasisṭha spoke to the king as follows: (34-35)

उपयाता नत्याप्र राजानस्तव शासनात्।

मयापि सकृता: सर्वे यथाई राजासत्तम ॥ 36  ॥

यत्रियं च कृतं सर्व पुरुषे: सुस्मापित्रेः ।

नियांतु च भवान् यर्दुं यत्रायतनमन्तिकात् ॥ 37  ॥

"Kings have arrived at your command, O tiger among men! Nay, all have been received with hospitality according to their deserts by me, O jewel among monarchs! Moreover, everything connected with the sacrifice has been got ready by your men

with great attention. Therefore, proceed you to the sacrificial hall close by to commence the sacrifice. (36-37)

सर्वकामीरूपद्धतेरपेतं वै समन्ततः।

त्रष्टुमहींस राजेन्द्र मनसेव विनिमिमन्। 38 ॥

"Be pleased, O king of kings, to inspect the hall, which is furnished on every side with all the desired objects got together by your men and looks as if provided by your mere wish." (38)

तथा वसित्वचनातृध्यशृज्ञ स्वोभयोः। दिवसे शुभनक्षेत्र नियांतो जगतीपति: ॥ 39  ॥

On the recommendation of both the sages, Vasiṣṭha and Rṣyaśrīnga, Dásaratha, the ruler of the earth, accordingly proceeded to the sacrificial hall on a day marked with a propitious constellation. (39)

ततो वसिष्ठप्रमुखा: सर्व एव द्विज्ञातमा:।

त्रव्यथगूँ पुरस्कृत्य यज्ञकर्मार्भस्तदा ॥ 40  ॥

यज्ञवाटं गता: सर्वे यथाशगस्तं यथाविधि।

श्रीमांश्र सह पत्नीभी राजा दीक्षामुपाविश्रत् ॥ 41  ॥

Having reached the sacrificial hall in a body, placing Rśyaśrṇa agghea ahead, all the foremost Brāhmanas with Vasiṣṭha as their leader (Acārya) then commenced the sacrifice according to the scriptural ordinance in the prescribed order the same day. Nay, the glorious Emperor with his consorts went through the ceremony of consecration in order to qualify themselves for the sacrificial performance. (40-41)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्याकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे जयोदश: सर्ग: ॥ 13  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirteen in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.



चतुर्देश: सर्गै:

Canto XIV

King Dáasaratha proceeds with the horse-sacrifice; Rysaśrñga grants him a boon regarding the birth of four sons

अथ संवत्सरे पूर्णों तस्मिन् प्रासे तुरंगमे।

सर्यव्याश्रिते तौर राजो यजोउभ्यवर्तेनि ॥ 1  ॥

The aforementioned horse having returned on the completion of a twelve month period after its release, the Aswamedha Yajña (horse-sacrifice) commenced on the northern bank of the Sarayü. (1)

अन्यश्रूई पुरस्कृत्य कर्म चकूर्दिंजर्षभा: । अश्रधये महायजे राजोउस्य सुमहात्मन: ॥ 2  ॥

Placing Rṣyaśrṇa at their head (as the arch-priest or Brahmā, whose function is to supervise a sacrifice, the other three priests officiating at a sacrifice being severally known by the names of Hota, Adhwaruyu and Udgata), the foremost among the Brāhmanas discharged their functions in the great Aśwamedha sacrifice started by this exceptionally noble-minded monarch.(2)

कर्म कुर्वन्ति विधिवद् याजका वेदपारगा:।

यथाविधि यथान्यायं परिकामन्ति शास्त्रतः ॥ 3  ॥

The priests officiating at the sacrifice, who had all mastered the Vedas, duly performed their respective duties and proceeded according to the scriptural ordinance abiding by the procedure laid down in the Kalpa-Sūtras and following the order of sequence given in the Mimārsā-Sāstra. (3)

प्रवर्यँ शास्ततः कृत्वा तथैवोपसदं द्विजा:।

चक्छुक विधिवत् सर्वमधिकं कर्म शास्ततः ॥ 4  ॥

Having gone through the rite known by the name of Pravargya (auxiliary to a horse-

sacrifice, in which fresh milk is poured into a heated vessel called Mahāvira or Gharma, or into boiling ghee) as well as through the Iṣṭi (a minor sacrifice) called Upasada, according to the scriptural ordinance, the Brāhmanas also duly performed every additional rite even beyond the express injunctions of the Śāstras. (4)

अधिपूज्य तदा हृद्या: सर्वे चकुर्थशाविधि।

प्रात:सवनपूर्वाणी कमाणी पुनिपुंगवा:।। 5 ।।

Offering worship to the gods, sought to be propitiated through the various rites, all the eminent sages officiating at the sacrifice duly performed, full of delight on the said occasion, the rites commencing from the morning Savana (i.e., morning Savana, midday Savana and third Savana) (act of pressing out the Soma juice). (5)

ऐन्छ श्रविष्यद् दुत्ते राजा चाधिषुतोजनः ।

मध्यन्दिनं च सवर्न प्रावर्ते यथाकमम्। 6  ॥

The oblation intended for Indra, the lord of paradise, was duly offered to him and the creeper* known by the name of Soma (the king of herbs), that drives away all sin, was crushed and its sap extracted. And the midday Savana was set on foot in due order. (6)

तृतीयसवनं चैव राजोस्य सुमहात्मन:।

चकुस्ते शास्त्रो तृद्धा यथा ब्राह्मणपुंगावा: ॥ 9  ॥

Ascertaining the procedure by reference to the Śāstras, those jewels among the Brāhmaṇas further duly conducted the third

* We read in the Kalpa-Sūtras on the subject :

‘सोम राजानं वृषदि निधाय वृषद्धिरभ्रन्त’

“Placing the creeper known by the name of King Soma on a slab of stone one should crush it by means of other stones.”

*VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

Savana on behalf of this exceptionally noble-minded monarch. (7)

आह्यांचिक्रे तत्र शकादीनु विबुधोतमान्।

ऋच्यशूजदाये मनैः शिक्षाश्रमसन्ति: १। 8 ।१

Through incantations marked with letter-sounds the correct pronunciation and intonation of which was picked up during the period of their study, Rysaśrīnga and others invoked the presence in that sacrificial hall of the foremost of gods headed by Indra, the ruler of gods. (8)

गीतिभिर्मधुरः सित्रार्थेमनाझ्ञानैर्यधारहतः ।

होतारो ददुरावाहा हविभोगान् दिवौकसमान् ॥ 9  ॥

Invoking them by means of charming invocatory Mantras (sacred texts) sweetened with songs of praise, the Hotas (priests whose function is to invoke the gods at a sacrifice) offered oblations to the gods (the denizens of heaven) according to their rank. (9)

न चाहुतमभूत तत्र सखलितं वा न किंचन।

दूरपते ब्रहावत् सर्वे क्षेमयुक्ते हि चक्रिटे ॥ 10  ॥

In that sacrifice no oblation was wrongly offered nor was any rite omitted through ignorance; for every item was seen accompanied with the uttering of a Mantra and the priests did everything in such a way as to avoid transgressions in the matter of procedure. (10)

न तेच्छसु शान्तो वा क्षुधितो वा न दूर्यते।

नाविद्वान् ब्राह्मणः कक्षिशास्तानुचरस्तथा ॥ 11  ॥

During those days when the sacrifice was in progress no priest officiating at the sacrifice was seen exhausted (too tired to carry on his duties) or hungry or even thirsty and there was no Brāhmaṇa, particularly in that sacrifice, who was not learned and did not have at least a hundred attendants/pupils. (11)

ब्राह्मण भुक्ते नियं नाथवन्तश भुक्ते ।

तापसा भुक्ते चापि प्रमाणाश्चैव भुक्ते ॥ 12  ॥

ब्रुद्धा व्याधिताश्चैव सीबालाशु तथेव च ।

अनिर्णं भुक्रमानां न तृसिफलपथ्यते ॥ 13  ॥

The Brāhmaṇas as well as the members of the other twice-born classes took their food everyday and so did the members of the servant class, the Śūdras and so on. The ascetics, the Brahmacāris and the Vanaprasthas, also took their meals under the auspices of the sacrifice and so did the recluses too as well as the aged and the diseased as also women and children. The dishes were so delicious that no satiety was observed in the latter, even though they were fed day and night. (12-13)

दीयतां दीयतामत्रे वासांसि विक्रियानि च।

इति संचोदितास्तत्र तथा चक्रुर्पनेकग: ॥ 14  ॥

Pressed by men at the helm of affairs in the words “Let food be given again and again and also articles of wearing apparel of various kinds!” many men in that sacrifice did as they were told, i.e., freely gave away food and raiment. (14)

अत्रकृटाध्र दूरभन्ते बहवः पर्वतीपापा:।

दिवसे दिवसे तत्र सिद्धस्य विक्षित्त् तदा ॥ 15  ॥

Numerous heaps, resembling mountains of rice cooked from day-to-day in the traditional way were seen on that occasion on the sacrificial grounds. (15)

नानादेशादनुपासाः पुरुषाः स्त्रीगणास्तथा ।

अत्रापनैः सुचिहितास्तिसम्न् यजे महात्मनः ॥ 16  ॥

The men as well as the hosts of women that had arrived from different lands were fully entertained at that sacrificial performance of the high-souled Emperor. (16)

अन्ने हि विधिवत् स्वादु प्रशंसिति द्विजर्षभाः ।

अहो तृना: स्म भई ने इति शुश्राव राघव: ॥ 17  ॥

The noble Brāhmaṇas spoke well of the food they ate as indeed cooked in the proper way and tasteful too and Dásaratha (a scion of Raghu) heard them saying, “Oh, we are fully sated. May you be blessed!” (17)

स्वलंकृताङ्ग पुरुषा ब्राह्माणा पर्यवेयम्।

उपासने च तानये सुमुद्यणिकुपडला: ११८।

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

Nay, men richly adorned served food to the Brāhmanas, while others, decked with earrings made of highly polished gems, waited upon the former in their turn. (18)

कर्मान्तरे तदा विषा हेतुवादान् बहूनपि।

प्राहु: सुवारिमनो धीरा: परस्यरिजीघया ॥ 19  ॥

During the interval between two Savanas (act of pressing out the Soma juice) on that occasion, intelligent and highly eloquent Brāhmanas put forward many reasoned arguments with the intention of getting the better of one another. (19)

दिवसे दिवसे तत्र संसरे कुशला द्विजा:।

सर्वकमांणि चकुसे तथाशास्वं प्रचोदिता: ॥ 20  ॥

From day-to-day in that sacrifice the aforesaid expert Brāhmanas discharged all the functions according to the scriptural ordinance as directed by the elders. (20)

नाषडईविद्यासीनान्वतो नाषड्धुत: । सदस्यतस्य वै राजो नावादुकुशलो हित्र: ॥ 21  ॥

No Brāhmaṇa holding the office of a Sadasya (whose duties are merely to look on and correct mistakes) in this sacrificial performance of that monarch (King Daśaratha) was not conversant with the six branches of knowledge auxiliary to the Vedas (viz., 1-Śikṣa or Phonetics, 2-Vyākaraṇa or Grammar, 3-Chandas or Prosody, 4-Niručka or Etymology, 5-Jyautiṣa or Astronomy and 6-Kalpa or the science which prescribes the ritual and gives rules for ceremonial or sacrificial acts), did not observe sacred vows and was not very learned or not skilled in argument. (21)

प्रापे युयोच्छ्ये तस्मिन् पष्ट् बैल्या: खादिरास्तथा।

तावन्तो बिल्वसहिता: पर्णिणश्रु तथा परे ॥ 22  ॥

When the time arrived for erecting the sacrificial pillars, there came to be set up in that sacrifice six pillars of Bilva wood, an equal number of Khadira, each by the side of a Bilva one, and six more of Palāśa. (22) श्लेन्मातकमयो दिवेदोरकमवसस्तथा। द्वावेव तन बिहितो बाहुव्यस्तपरिष्रही ॥ 23  ॥

One pillar of Śleśmātaka is recommended and so are recommended pillars of deodar (the Himalayan cedar). Two only of such pillars of deodar are recommended in the aforesaid sacrifice viz., Aśwamedha and they should stand at a distance of six feet from one another. (23) कारिता: सर्व एवैते शास्त्रजैर्यक्राविवे: । शोभार्थ तस्य व्रास्य काऊत्रानलंकृता भवन् । 24  ॥

All these had been got ready beforehand under the directions of those well-versed in the scriptures and proficient in the sacrificial technique and had been plated with gold for gracing the sacrifice. (24)

एकविंशतिव्यासते एकविंशत्यरूप:।

वासोपिरेकविंशपीद्रकेकं समतंकृता: ॥ 25  ॥

Those twenty-one pillars were twenty-one spans high and had been duly adorned (covered) with as many pieces of cloth, each with one. (25)

वियस्ता विधिवत् सर्वे शिल्यिभि: सुकृता दुबा: ।

अष्टास्वय: सर्वे एवं रूलक्षणरूपसमित्वता: ॥ 26  ॥

Having been beautifully shaped by carpenters, they were all strong and had been fixed according to the scriptural ordinance. Nay, they were all octangular and had been provided with a smooth surface. (26)

आच्छातितासे वासोभि: पुर्षेगन्थेध्र पूर्जिता: ।

ससर्षेयो दीसिमन्तो विराजने यथा दिवि ॥ 21  ॥

Covered with pieces of cloth and worshipped with flowers and sandal-pastes, they shone bright as the constellation known by the name of the Great Bear, presided over by the seven Rşis, in the heavens. (27)

इच्छाक्ष यथान्ययं कारिताश्र प्रमाणतः ।

चितोःसिनबाईशणैसत्र कुशलैः शिल्यकर्मिण ॥ 28  ॥

The bricks had been made according to the measurements given in the scriptures



and with them was the sacrificial altar constructed by priests skilled in the architecture pertaining to sacrifices. (28)

स चित्यो राजसिंहस्य संचित: कुशलेर्दिजैः।

गरकुं रुक्मपछो वै चित्रगुपो ३टदाशात्मकः ॥ 29  ॥

The sacrificial fire meant for that altar and going to be worshipped by Dáśaratha (a lion among kings) was placed with due ceremony by expert Brāhmanas. (According to the shape of the altar in which the fire was placed) the fire resembled in shape a figure of Garudā with his wings and tail distended and looking downward facing the east with wings of gold (due to the sides of the pit having been constructed with bricks of gold). Being treble in size as compared to ordinary altars, it consisted of eighteen sacrificial pits (an ordinary altar comprising of six only). (29)

नियुक्तास्त्र पशवस्तादृष्य दैवतम्।

उरगा: पक्षिणश्रैव यथाशास्पप्रचोदिता: ॥ 30  ॥

Beasts, serpents and birds too, ordained by scriptural injunctions, had been tied down to those pillars for being offered to particular gods. (30)

शामिते तु ह्यस्तत्र तथा जलचाराश्रु ये।

ऋषिधि: सर्वमैवैतविर्युक्तं शास्तस्तदा ॥ 31  ॥

The sacrificial horse as well as the aquatic creatures (turtle etc.,) that had been brought there for the act of sacrifice, all these were bound that very moment by the seers/priests, according to the scriptural ordinance. (31)

पशूनां विश्रतं तत्र यूपेषु नियतं तदा।

अश्वरतोतमं तत्र राजो दशरथस्य हह ॥ 32  ॥

Three hundred beasts were tied down at that time to the aforesaid pillars; the foremost of the best horses belonging to King Daśaratha too, they say, was tied down there. (32)

कौसल्या तं हयं तत्र परिचर्यं समन्ततः ।

कृपाणीविसारेनैर विभिः परमया मुदा ॥ 33  ॥

Consecrating the said horse on all sides (by sprinkling it with water and so on) there, Kausalyā as also the other queens touched it with great joy with three swords. (33)

पतलिणा तदा सार्शं सुर्थितेन च चेतसा।

अवसद् रजनीोकां कौसल्या धर्मकाव्यया ॥ 34  ॥

Nay, with intent to acquire religious merit Kausalyā then spent one night with the said horse (swift as Garuḍa, the king of the winged creation) with a perfectly composed mind. (34)

होताव्यैस्थोह्राता हस्तेन समयोजयन्।

महिष्या परिवृष्णाश वावातामपरां तथा ॥ 35  ॥

The four archiprests' officiating at the sacrifice, viz., the Hotā, the Adhwaryu, the Udgātā and the Brahmā then at the close of the night caused the king's second wife\( ^{2} \) (ordinarily belonging to the Vaiśya class and bearing the generic name of Vāvatā) along with the first wife (bearing the class-name of Mahiṣi) as well as the third wife (known by the class-name of Pariyṛtti) to be brought into contact with the horse. (35)

1. Of the four priests mentioned above, the Hotā invokes the gods at a sacrifice, reciting the Rgveda; the Adhwaru's duty is to measure the ground, to build the altar, to collect and arrange the sacrificial vessels, to fetch wood and water, to light the fire and so on, repeating the texts of the Yajurveda while doing so; the Udgātā chants the hymns of the Sāmaveda; while the duty of the Brahmā, who is required to be the most learned of them all and is expected to know all the Vedas, is to supervise the sacrifice.

2. The kings in ancient India generally had three wives. The first of them, who was required to be a Ksatriya princess, and was consecrated along with her husband during the ceremony of installation on the throne, bore the generic name of Mahisī; the second one, who could be taken from the Vaiśya class, was known by the name of Vāvātā; while the third wife, who could be taken from the Śūdra class, bore the designation of Parivrtti. In the case of Daśaratha, however, all the three queens, severally known by the names of Kausalyā, Sumitrā and Kaikeyī—were Ksatriya princesses.

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

পতলিগত্সহ বামآদুধুফ লিম்ள্টির: ১

སྟལྟལྟ, परমসময়ঃ. প্রথমমাসায় গাফত: 11 3६ 11

Taking out the edible part of the tuber known by the name of Aśwakanda (or Aśwagandha, the plant Phys lis flexuosa), the chief priest, who had duly controlled his senses and possessed great skill in performing sacrificial rites, cooked it according to the scriptural ordinance. (36)

ཅུམཁམ་ ཐལམཁམ་ ཞབཟི་ མཁ་ མཁ་ མཁ་ མཁ་ མཁ་ མཁ་ མཁ་ མཟི་ མཁ་ མཁ་ མཁ་ མཁ་ མཁ་ མཁ་

The king smelt at the proper time according to the scriptural ordinance the odour of the steam of the tuber, driving away thereby his sin, standing in the way of his getting a son. (37)

हयस्य यानि चाङ्गानि तानि सर्वाणि ब्राह्माण:।

असनौ प्राय्यन्ति विध्धित्व समसता: चोडशलिंब: ॥ 38  ॥

All the sixteen Brāḥmana priests taking part in the sacrificial performances in a body cast into the sacrificial fire with due ceremony all the articles worth consigning into the fire as parts of a horse-sacrifice.(38)

लक्षशालासु यज्ञानाम्येचां क्रियते हवि: । अश्वमेधस्य यज्ञस्य वैतसे० भाग इच्छते ॥ 39  ॥

Whereas the offering to be made at other sacrifices is placed on the boughs of a Plaksa tree, that to be made at an Aśwamedha sacrifice is required to be placed on mats of cane. (39)

ऋहोउपविधः संख्यातः कल्यसूत्रोग झाहणोः।

चन्तुटोममहस्तस्य प्रथमं परिकल्पितम् ॥ 40  ॥

A horse-sacrifice has been declared in the Kalpa-Sūtras as well as in the Brāhmanas as having its three days allotted to Savana (the rite of pressing out the Soma juice). Catuṣṭoma (Jyotiṣṭoma) has been mentioned to be the name of the Savana to be performed on the first of these three days. (40)

उक्य्यं द्वितीयं संख्यातमितिरातं तथोतसरम्।

कारितास्तत्र बह्वो विहिताः शास्त्रदर्शनात् ॥ 41  ॥

The second day's Savana has been named as Ukthya, while that to be performed the next (third) day has been designated as Atirātra. Many other secondary sacrifices too as enjoined from the Śāstrika point of view were performed by King Dáśaratha on that occasion towards the conclusion of the horse-sacrifice. (41)

न्योतिष्टोमायुणी वैवमातिराजी च निर्मिति।

अधिभजिद्धशज्चैववमोगेशेमी महाकतु: ॥ 42  ॥

Jyotiṣtoma and Āyuṣtoma, two rounds of Atiraṭra, Abhijit and Viśwajit and two rounds of Aptoryāma—these were the eight great sacrifices performed on the said occasion. (42)

प्राणीं होते ददौ राजा दिषं स्वकुलवधनः। अध्यवैये प्रतीचीं तु ब्रहणो दक्षिणां दिषगम्।। 43  ॥ उद्रात्रे तु तथोदीचीं दक्षिणेणा विनिमिता । अश्रमेधे महारवेउ स्वयभ्यूविति पुरा ॥ 44  ॥

At the conclusion of the sacrifice the Emperor, the promoter of his race, gave away as Dakṣinā or sacrificial fee the eastern quarter of the globe to the Hotā, the western to the Adhwaryu, the southern quarter to the Brahmā and the northern to the Udgātā. Such is the Dakṣinā prescribed for the great sacrifice of Aśwamedha, which was performed for the first time by Brahmā, the self-born creator of the universe. (43-44)

क्रतुं समाय्य तु तत्ता न्यायतः पुरुषर्षभः।

श्रल्पन्यो हि ददौ राजा धरां तां कुलवर्धिनः ॥ 45  ॥

Having concluded the great sacrifice according to the scriptural ordinance, the Emperor, a jewel among men and the promoter of his race, actually gave away to the priests, who officiated at the sacrifice the earth itself (as specified above) on the said occasion. (45)

एवं दत्ता प्रह्छो5भूखीमानिश्वाकुनन्दनः ।

श्रलिजलवघुबन् सर्वे राजानं गताकिजिबम्य॥ 46  ॥

Having made the aforesaid gifts, the

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

glorious Daśaratha, a scion of Ikşwāku, felt extremely delighted. All the priests, however, spoke as follows to the sinless king: (46)

भवानेव महीं कृल्वामेको रक्षितुमहिति ।

न भूया कार्यमसाकं नहि शक्ता: स्म पालनं ॥ 47  ॥

"You alone are able to protect the entire globe. We have nothing to do with the earth nor are we able to maintain it. (47)

रता: स्वाध्यायकरणे वयं नित्यं हि भूमिपा।

निष्कयं किंचिदेवेह प्रयच्छतु भवानिति ॥ 48  ॥

"As we are constantly devoted to the prosecution of the study of the Vedas, O protector of the earth, give you anything, whatsoever by way of consideration at this moment. (48)

मणिरलं सुवर्णं वा गावो यद् वा समुद्यतम्।

तत् प्रयच्छ नृपश्रेषु धरण्या न प्रयोजनम् ॥ 49  ॥

"Bestow on us some superb gem, gold or cows or whatever may be available, O jewel among the protectors of men! We have no use for the earth." (49)

एवम्पुक्तो नरपतिब्रांष्टाणैर्नैदपारगै: 1

गवां शतसहस्वाणि दूरा तेभ्यो दूदी नृप: 11 4० 11

दूरशकोटि सुवर्णस्य रजतस्य चतुर्णुणम्।

ऋल्पिजस्तु ततः सर्वे प्रददुः सहिता वसु: 11 4१ 11

ऋध्यशृज्य मुनये वसिष्ठय च धीमते।

ततले न्यायतः कृत्वा प्रविभागं हिजोत्तमा: 11 4२ 11

सुप्रीतमनसः सर्वे प्रत्यूचुर्मेदिता भृशम्।

ततः प्रसर्पकैभ्यस्तु हिरणयं सुसमाहितः 11 4३ 11

जाम्बूनं कोटिसंख्यं ब्राह्माणेथो ददो तदा।

दरिश्रय हिजायथ हस्ताभरणामुत्तमम् 11 4४ 11

कर्मेचिद् याचमानाय ददो राधवनन्दनः।

ततः प्रोतेपु विक्रधिद्ध दिजेषु हिजवत्सलः 11 4५ 11

प्रणाममकरोत् तेनां हर्षेच्याकृतिलोत्रिजः।

तस्याशिषो3श विक्रधा ब्राह्मणे: समुदाहता: 11 4६ 11

उदारस्य नृवीरस्य धरणयां पतितस्य च।

ततः प्रोतमना राजा प्राय यजम्ननुतमम् 11 4७ 11

पापापहं स्वर्णनं दुरतरं पार्थिवर्षपि:।

ततो3ब्रबीवृष्यश्रुं राजा दशरथस्तदा 11 4८ 11

Told thus by the Brāhmanas, who were all masters of the Vedas, the king, who acknowledged none other as his own ruler, bestowed on them ten lakhs of cows, a hundred million gold coins and four times as many silver coins (rupees). Thereupon all the priests combined handed over the entire wealth to the sage Sryasārgna and the wise Vasistha for equitable distribution. Having had the whole wealth equitably divided through Sryasārgna and Vasistha, all those eminent Brāhmanas now felt much delighted at heart and said, "We are highly pleased." Fully composed in mind, the king then gave away on that very occasion ten million gold coins to Brāhmanas that had come from outside to witness the sacrifice. When no money was left on hand for distribution, Daśaratha (the delight of Raghu's race) promptly gave away one of his excellent bangles to a certain unknown indigent Brāhmaṇa who asked for a gift. The Brāhmanas having been duly propitiated, the king, who was so fond of the Brāhmanas and whose senses were all excited through joy, offered salutation to them. On that magnanimous soul, a hero among men, lying prostrate on the ground, benedictions of various kinds were forthwith pronounced in suitable words by the Brāhmanas. The king now felt delighted at heart to have succeeded in completing the sacrifice, unsurpassed by any other, capable of dispelling sins (that stood in the way of his getting a male progeny) and transporting him to heaven and was hard to carry through even for the foremost of kings. Daig Naśaratha then said to Rṣyaśrīnga on that very occasion: (50-58)

कुलस्य वर्धनं तत् तु कतुर्महसि सूत्रत।

तथेति च स राजानमुवाच् द्विजसतम:।

भविष्यन्ति सूता राजश्रवारसते कुलोढ़हा:॥ 51  ॥

"Be pleased, O sage of auspicious vows, to do further that which may tend to promote my race." "I shall do accordingly,"

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

replied that jewel among the Brāhmanas to the king, “so that four such sons will be born to you as will propagate your race.”(59)

स तय वाक्यं मभूरं निश्णय प्रणाथ तमै प्रपतो नृपदः ।

जगाम हर्ष परमं महात्मा तनुष्यशुई पुनरयुवाता ॥ 60  ॥

That high-souled and piously-disposed Emperor experienced great joy to hear his sweet assurance and bowing low to him, reiterated his prayer to the celebrated Rṣyaśrṅga. (60)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाज्ये बालकागड़े चतुदंश: सर्पि ॥ 14  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fourteen in the Bálakāṇḍa of the glorious Ramāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

पऊदर्श: सर्गै:

Canto XV

Rṣyaśrīga conducts a sacrifice for securing the birth of sons to Dáśaratha; the gods approach Brahmā in that very sacrifice with a prayer for bringing about the death of Rāvaṇa; Brahmā implores Lord Viṣnu (also present there) to descend in the house of Dáśaratha and do away with Rāvaṇa and the Lord undertakes to kill Rāvaṇa

मेधावी तु ततो ध्याला स किंचिददमुत्तम्।

लक्ष्यसंज्ञततस्ते तु वेदजो नृपमब्रवीत् ॥ 1  ॥

Having deeply pondered a little then as to what should be done next and presently becoming conscious of his surrounding, the highly intelligent Rysaśrīnga, well-versed in the Vedas, spoke to King Daśaratha as follows: (1)

इष्टि तेर्ह करिष्यामि पुत्रीयां पुत्रकारणात्।

अथर्वशिरसि प्रोकैर्मनैः: सिद्धां विधानतः ॥ 2  ॥

"For the sake of securing sons to you I shall duly perform a sacrifice capable of procuring a male progeny and well-known for its unfailing effect with the help of Mantras (sacred texts) taught in the Atharva-Veda."

(2)

ततः प्राकमिद्धि 3 तां पुरीयां पुत्रकारणात्।

जुहावाग्नी च तेजस्वी मन्त्रदृष्टेन कर्माणा ॥ 3  ॥

For securing the birth of four sons to Dasaratha, the glorious Rysaśrṇa forthwith commenced the said sacrifice capable of

procuring a male progeny, and poured oblations into the sacred fire according to the procedure shown in the sacred texts.

(3)

ततो देवा: सगम्बर्धा: सिद्धाश्र परमर्धेय:।

भागपतिश्रार्थ वे समवेता यथाविधि ॥ 2  ॥

The various gods, including Brahma, accompanied by Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Siddhas (a class of semi-divine beings naturally endowed with mystic powers), and the greatest of seers assembled there to accept in person their share of offerings according to the established procedure. (4)

ना: समेलय यथान्ययं तस्मिन् सदसि देता: ।

अब्बल्लोककतारं ब्रह्माणं वचनं ततः ॥   ॥

Approaching Brahmā, the maker of the universe, in that very assembly, congregated for the sacrifice, according to their respective rank (of course unperceived by mortal men), the aforesaid divinities presently addressed the following prayer to him: (5)



भगवंस्त्वसारेने रावणो नाम राश्रस: 1

सर्वान् नो बाधते वीयांच्छासितुं ते न शक्नमुः ॥ 6  ॥

“By dint of the prowess acquired through your grace, O lord, the ogre named Ravana is molesting us all. We cannot subdue him. (6)

त्वया तस्मै वरो दत्त: प्रीतेन भगवंस्तदा।

मानयतश्च ते नित्यं सर्वे तत्थ क्षमामहे ॥ 7  ॥

"A boon was conferred on him by you while he was practising austerities, O lord, pleased as you were with him. And respecting it, as we do, we have always brooked all his wrong doings. (7)

उद्वेजयति लोकांरसीनुष्टितान् ढ्रेष्टि दुर्मिति:।

शक्र क्रि द्विशराजानं प्रधर्षयितुमिच्छति १८ ॥

"The evil-minded fellow is harassing all the three worlds, hates the exalted (prosperous) and seeks to overpower even Indra, the lord of paradise. (8)

ऋर्शीन् यक्षान् सग्रभ्बान् ब्राह्मणानसुरांस्तथा।

अतिक्रामति दुर्धियों वरदानेन मोहितः ॥ 9  ॥

"Infatuated by the boon conferred by you and hard to subdue, he treats profanely Rṣis, Yakṣas (a class of demigods) including Gandharvas, the Brāhmaṇas and demons. (9)

नैनं सूर्य: प्रतपति पाश्रें वांति न माफतः।

चलोर्मिमाली तं दूघा समुझोरपि न कम्पते ॥ 10  ॥

"The sun does not scorch him in midsummer, the wind does not blow furiously past him. Seeing him, the ocean does not get agitated, though naturally consisting of turbulent waves. (10)

तमहत्रो भयं तत्माद्र राक्षसाद् घोरदर्शनात्।

वधार्थं तस्य भगवनृपायं कतुर्महंसि ॥ 11  ॥

"Theforee we are much afraid of that ogre of frightful aspect. Be pleased, O lord, to devise some means of putting an end to him." (11)

एवमुक्तः सुरैः सर्वैश्रन्तियला ततो३ब्रवीता।

ह्नतायं विदितस्तस्य वधीपायो दुरात्मन: ॥ 12  ॥

Pondering a while when prayed to thus by all the gods, Brahmā now said, “I am glad the means of despatching that evil-minded fellow has come to my mind. (12)

तेन ग्रन्थवैथ्गणां देवतानां च रक्षसाम्।

अवध्यो3स्मिति वागुक्ता तथेत्युक्तं च तत्मया ॥ 13  ॥

“Let me prove incapable of being killed by the Gandharvas and Yakṣas, gods and ogres!” This was the prayer addressed by him (to me) and ‘So be it!’ were the words uttered by me then. (13)

नाकातैनयदवज्ञानात् तद् श्रंशो मानुर्पांस्तदा ।

तस्मात् स मानुर्बाद् वध्यो मूलनुर्जीयोर्य विद्यते ॥ 14  ॥

"The said ogre did not mention human beings on that occasion out of contempt for them. Therefore, he is doomed to being killed by a human being alone; otherwise there is no death for him." (14)

एतच्छूला प्रियं वाक्यं ब्रहणा समुदाहतम्।

देवा महर्षय: सर्वे प्रहच्छतसेभवंस्तदा ॥ 15  ॥

All the divinities and great Rsis mentioned above felt supremely delighted at that moment to hear this happy revelation communicated by Brahmā. (15)

एतस्मिन्तरे विष्णुरूपयातो महाधूतिः ।

शढ़ुचक्रगदापाणिः: पीतवासा जगत्यति: ॥ 16  ॥

बैनतंये समाहूढ़ा भास्करसतीयदं यथा ।

तसहाटककेयूरो वच्यानः सुरोतमे: ॥ 17  ॥

In the meantime arrived there, riding on the back of Gurudā (the king of birds) as the sun on a cloud, the extremely resplendent Viṣṇu, the Lord of the universe, clad in yellow and wielding a conch, discus and mace in His hands, nay, decked with a pair of armlets of refined gold and being glorified by the foremost of gods. (16-17)

ब्रहणा च समागल तत्र तस्थी समाहितः ।

तमब्रुवन् सुरा: सर्वे समधिषट्य संनता: ॥ 18  ॥

Nay, meeting Brahmā, He took His position there (in that assembly), composed in mind. Duly extolling Him and bent low



in reverence, all the gods prayed to Him as follows: (18)

ल्वां नियोक्ष्यामहे विषणो लोकानां हितकाम्यया।

राज़ो दूसराथ्य त्यमयोध्याधितपेबिभो ॥ 19  ॥

धर्मत्रय वदान्यस्य महिष्यमतेसतः।

अस्य भार्यस्तु तिसपु श्रीश्रीकौतु्यपमासु च ॥ 20  ॥

विण्यो पुरात्वमागच्छ कृत्वा5स्तानं चतुर्विधम्।

तत्र तं व मानुषो भृत्वा प्रवढ़ं लोककणटकम् ॥ 21  ॥

अवध्यं द्वेलैविण्यो समरे जहि रावणम्।

स हि देवानूसगन्थवन् सिद्धांश्र ऋषिसतनमात् ॥ 22  ॥

राक्षसो रावणो मूर्खीं वीयोंरेकेन गाथते।

ऋषयश्र ततत्नेन गन्थवर्णससलथा ॥ 23  ॥

क्रीडन्तो नन्द्रवने रौरेण विनिपातिता: ।

वधार्थं वयवायातातस्वर वे मुनिनिः सह ॥ 24  ॥

सिद्धगन्धवंयक्षाश्रु ततस्वां शरणं गता: ।

त्वं गति: परमा देेव सर्वेधां न: परंतप ॥ 25  ॥

"With intent to ensure the good of the worlds, O Viṣṇu, we are going to lay a burden on you. Yourself taking the form of four personalities, O all-pervading Lord, play You the role of a son to the munificent King Daśaratha, the ruler of Ayodhyā—who knows what is right and is possessed of splendour equivalent to that of great Rīsīs—through his three wives (Kausalya, Sumitrā and Kaikeyi), who are akin to Hī, Śrī and Kirti* (daughters of Dakṣa). Appearing in a human semblance through them, O Viṣṇu, pray, make short work, in an encounter, of Rāvana, the scourge of the world, who has grown very strong and is incapable of being killed by other gods. Through excess of prowess that fool of a Rāvaṇa, who has developed the disposition of an ogre, is actually oppressing the gods including the Gandharvas, the Siddhas as well as the noblest of Rāsis. Nay, because of such a disposition, Rāsis as well as Gandharvas and Apsarās (celestial nymphs) sporting in the Nandana Vana (the pleasure-garden of Indra) were knocked down from heaven

by that fierce ogre. For getting rid of him, we as well as Siddhas, Gandharvas and Yakṣas have come here alongwith hermits and have sought You as our protector for the same purpose, O lord! You are the supreme resort of us all, O Chastiser of foes! (19-25)

वधाय देवसूर्णा नृणा लोके मन: कुरः।

एवं स्तुतस्तु देवेशेग विद्याप्रिदशपुरंपण: ।। 26  ।।

पितामहुपुरोगांस्तान् सर्वलोकनमस्कुतः ।

अब्बीत् विद्यान् सर्वान् समेतान् धर्मसंहितान् ।। 27  ।।

"Therefore, resolve to descend into the mortal plane for the destruction of the enemies of gods." Thus extolled by the gods and others, Lord Viṣṇu, the Ruler of gods and the foremost among them, the adored of all the worlds, addressed (as follows) the assembled gods, headed by Brahmā (the progenitor of the entire creation), who were all given to piety: (26-27)

भयं स्वजत भर्ते वो हितार्थं युधि राजयणम्।

सपुत्रपौत्रं सामात्यं समन्रिज्ञातिवाभ्यवम् ॥ 28  ॥

हत्वा कूरं दुराधर्षे देवर्षीणं भयावहम्।

द्रशवर्षेसहशाणि द्रशवर्षशतानि च ॥ 29  ॥

वत्स्यामि मानुषे लोके पालयम् पुधिवीमिमाम्।

एवं दत्त्वा वरं देदो देवानां विद्युगत्मवनम् ॥ 30  ॥

मानुष्ये चित्तयामास जनभ्युमियथात्मचन: ।

ततः पयपतगाश्रश: कृत्वा.उरमानं चतुर्विधम् ॥ 31  ॥

पितरं रोचयामास तदा द्वशरथं नृपम्।

ततो देवविंशम्बवां: सरूत्रा: सापरोगगणा: ।

सुतितिभिर्दिव्यरूपाधिभस्तुष्टवृमध्रुसूदनम् ॥ 32  ॥

"Give up all fear. May good betide you! Despatching on the field of battle in your interests the cruel and formidable Rāvaṇa—who is difficult to overpower and is the terror of gods and Rāsis—alongwith his sons and grandsons, including his ministers and counsellors, kinsmen and relations, I shall remain on the mortal plane ruling over this globe for eleven thousand

* The female deities presiding over modesty, fortune and fame.

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

years." Having granted the aforesaid boon, the high-souled Lord Vişnu, the adored even of gods, now thought of Ayodhyà, the place of His projected birth, on the mortal plane. Then Himself taking the form of four personalities, the Lord, whose eyes resemble the petals of a lotus, wished King Daśaratha to be His father in that descent. Thereupon the gods, Rşis and Gandharvas, accompanied by Lord Rudra and bevies of Apsarâs, extolled Lord Vişnu (the Destroyer of the demon Madhu) by means of hymns, depicting His transcendent personality :

(28-32)

तमूढ़तं रावणमुप्रतेनसं प्रवृद्धदर्प विद्येश्वाप्रदिष्यम्।

विरावणं साधु तप्तिक्वण्टकं तप्तिवनामुद्रतं धं भयावह्न् ॥ 33  ॥

"Pray, completely destroy that notorious

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे पडलरा: सर्ग: ॥ 15  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifteen in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

षोडगः सर्गः

Canto XVI

A dialogue between Lord Viṣṇu and the gods bearing on Rāvana; on the disappearance of the Lord an attendant of Prajāpati (Lord Viṣṇu, the Protector of all created beings) rises from the sacrificial pit and hands over to Daśaratha a basin containing milk boiled with rice and sugar and the latter divides it among his wives

ततो नारायणो विद्युपरिनुक्तः सुरसत्तमैः ।

जानत्रपि सुरानेवं रूल्णगं वचनमब्रवीत् ॥ 1  ॥

Solicited thus by the foremost of the gods, the all-pervading Nārāyaṇa, though knowing everything, thereupon addressed the following sweet words to the gods: (1)

उपायः को वधे तस्य राक्षसाधिपते: सुरा: ।

यमहं तं समास्थाय निर्व्यापूषिकणटकम् ॥ 2  ॥

"What can be the device for despatching the aforesaid ruler of the ogres, O gods, by

resorting to which I may be able to uproot that thorn in the side of the Rsis?" (2)

एवमुक्ता: सुरा: सर्वे प्रत्यूर्विविष्यमव्यम्।

मानुपं रूपमास्थाय रावणं जहि संसुरो ॥ 3  ॥

Asked thus by the Lord, all the gods replied to the immortal Lord Viṣṇu as follows: "Assuming a human semblance, make short work of Rāvana in battle. (3)

स हि तेये तपस्तीत्र दीर्घंकालमरिद्म।

येन तृत्ये3भवद्र ब्रह्मा लोककृल्लोकपूर्वर्ज: १४ ॥

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

"The fellow indeed practised for a long time, O Chastiser of foes, severe austerities by which Brahmā, the maker of the universe and the progenitor of all created beings, got much pleased. (4)

संतुष्टः प्रददौ तस्मै राक्षसाय वरं प्रभुः। नानाविशेष्यो भूतेष्यो भयं नान्यत्र मानुषण् ॥ 5  ॥

“Highly gratified, Brahmā conferred on that ogre a boon to the effect that he would have no fear from the different species of created beings other than man. (5)

अवज्ञाता: पुरा तेन वरदाने हि मानवा: । एवं पितमाहृत् तत्समद् वरदानेन गर्दितः ॥ 6  ॥ ३ स्तावद्यति लोकास्वीन् सिवयश्राप्यफर्बीत । तत्समत् तत्स वधो दृष्टो मानुषेध्यः परंतप ॥ 7  ॥

"At the time of receiving the boon of yore, really speaking, men were treated as of no account and were left out of consideration by him. Elated thus by the boon received from the aforesaid Brahma, the progenitor of the entire creation, he is oppressing all the three worlds and carries off womenfolk. Hence his death has been ordained at the hands of man, O Chastiser of foes!" (6-7)

इस्वैतद् वचनं श्रुता सुराणों विद्युग्रात्मवान्।

प्रितरं रोचयामास तदा द्वगर्ध नृपम् ॥   ॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of the gods, the high-souled Lord Viṣnu then desired King Daśaratha to be His father. (8)

स चाययुग्ने पृगतिस्तमिन् काले महाब्रुक्ति:।

अथवज् पुर्वियामिथ्ट पुर्वेपुररिपूर्दन: ॥ 9  ॥

Desirous of getting a son, since he had no male issue, the aforesaid monarch too, who was possessed of great splendour and was capable of destroying his foes, performed at that very time a sacrifice calculated to procure him a son. (9)

स कुला निश्रयं विद्याप्रमान्य च पितामहम् ।

अन्तर्धानं गतो देवैः पून्यमानो महर्भिभि: ॥ 10  ॥

Having made up His mind accordingly,

and saying good-bye to Brahma, the progenitor of the entire creation, the said Lord Viṣṇu disappeared even while He was being worshipped by the gods and great Rṣis. (10)

तते वै यजमानस्य पावकादतुलप्रभम्।

ग्रादुभूतं महद् भृतं महावीरं महावलम् ॥ 1  ॥

Then, indeed, there arose from the fire (known as the Ahavaniya) of the sacrificer an extraordinary being, possessed of matchless splendour and endowed with exceptional prowess and uncommon strength. (11)

कृष्ण रक्ताम्बरधरं रक्तायं दुदुर्भिस्वनम्।

सिचशद्येक्षतनुजगमश्रुपवरमूधैजम् ॥ 12 ॥

Dark-complexioned with a ruddy countenance and a voice resembling the sound of a large kettledrum, he was clad in red and had soft and excellent hair resembling a lion's all over his body, about his lower face and on his upper lip as well as on his head. (12)

शुभलक्षणसम्बनं दिव्याभरणभूषितम्।

शैलशूझसमुपलेशं दूमशादूर्विकमम् ॥ 13  ॥

Invested with auspicious marks on his body and decked with celestial jewels, he possessed the height of a mountain-peak and stroke like a proud tiger. (13)

दिवाकससमाकारं दौभानलगिरखोपमम्।

तसजाम्बूनदमर्षी राजतानपरिक्छदाम् ॥ 14  ॥

दिव्यपायसस्मूर्णा पात्रीं पत्नीमिव प्रियाम्।

प्रगृहा विपूर्णां दोर्भयं स्वयं मायामयीमिव ॥ 15  ॥

His figure shone like the sun and he looked like a flame of blazing fire and personally carried in both his arms a large basin of refined gold—full of ethereal Pāyasa (milk boiled with rice and sugar) and covered with a silver lid, as though a product of magic—even as one would carry one's beloved spouse. (14-15)

समवेक्ष्याब्वीव् वाक्यमिदं दूरशर्ध नृपम्।

प्राजापत्यं नरं विद्धि मामिहाथ्यानतं नृप् ११६॥

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

Gazing at King Daśaratha he addressed the following words to him: “Know me, O protector of men, to be a messenger of Viṣnu (the Protector of created beings) arrived here from His realm.” (16)

ततः परं तदा राजा प्रत्युवाच कृताझलि:।

भगवन् स्वागतं तेउस्तु किमहं करवाणि ते ॥ 17  ॥

Thereupon the king replied to him with folded hands, “May my hearty welcome be acceptable to you, O divine personage! What shall I do for you?” (17)

अशो पुनरिंदं वाक्यं प्राजापत्यो नरोउ्बवीत्।

राजबन्यैता देवानच प्रासमिदं त्वया ॥ 18  ॥

The servant of Lord Vişnu now spoke the following words to him: “By worshipping the gods by means of a horse-sacrifice and a sacrifice performed for the sake of a male progeny, has this reward been secured by you today, O king! (18)

इरं तु नृपशादूल पायसं देवानिमित्।

प्रजाकरं गृहाण त्वं धन्यमारोयवधीनम् ॥ 11  ॥

"Receive, O tiger among kings, this Pāyasa prepared by the gods, which is not only capable of procuring a son, but is also conducive to wealth and a promoter of health too. (19)

भार्याणामनुक्रूपाणामश्नीतेत प्रयच्छे थे।

तासु त्वं लप्यसे पुत्रान् यदर्थ यजसे नृप।। 20 ।।

"Give it to your wives, that are worthy of you, i.e., belonging to your own Varna or grade of society and sharing your virtues, with the words 'Eat it all of you!' Through them, who partake of it, you will secure four sons, for whom you have been performing sacrifices, O protector of men!" (20)

तथेति नृपति: प्रीतः शिरसा प्रतिगृहा तान्।

पार्यीं देवासम्पूर्णों देवदन्तों हिरणमयीम् ॥ 21  ॥

अधिवाह्य च तद् भूतम्बडूत प्रियदर्शनम्।

मुद्रा परमया युत्भ्रकाराधिपदक्षिणम् ॥ 22  ॥

Accepting delightfully with his head bent

low and with the words “So be it!” the aforesaid gold basin, full of heavenly food and vouchsafed by the Lord, and greeting that extraordinary being of delightful aspect, the king, full of supreme joy, went round him clock-wise as a mark of respect. (21-22)

ततो दूरस्थः प्राय्य पायसं देविनिर्मितम्।

बभूर परमप्रीतः प्राय्य वित्तमिवधनः ॥ 23  ॥

Dáśaratha felt highly pleased to secure from him the Pāyasa prepared by the gods, even as a pauper would on obtaining riches. (23)

ततस्तद्धूतप्रधृतं भृतं परमभास्वरम्।

संवर्तीयता तत् कर्म तवैबान्तरधीयता ॥ 24  ॥

Having disposed of that duty of handing over the Pāyasa to the king, that most effulgent being of wonderful appearance then vanished into the fire itself. (24)

हर्षरस्मिभरूढ्रोत तस्यात:पुरमाबर्षो।

शारदस्याधिरामय चन्द्रस्य नर्भो३शूधिः ॥ 25  ॥

Irradiated by beams of joy playing on his countenance, the gynaecum, to which he now hastened, shone bright like the firmament illumined by the rays of the delightful autumnal full moon. (25)

सो5:त:पूरं प्रविश्येव कौसल्यामिदमब्रवीत्।

पायसं प्रतिगूर्हीच पुत्रीयं त्विद्यात्मक्न: ॥ 26  ॥

Immediately on entering the gynaecuum he spoke to Kausalyā, his eldest wife, as follows—“Accept this Pāyasa, which is indeed calculated to procure you a son.” (26)

कौसल्यार्ये नरपति: पायसाई दूरी तदा ।

अर्धाद्धिं दूरी चापि सुभित्रायै नराधिप: ॥ 27  ॥

With the object of getting them a son each, the king then gave half of the Pāyasā to Kausalyā and the Emperor made over one half of the other half to Sumitā, his second wife, too. (27)

कैकेव्ये चावशिष्टध्वं द्वुरी पूत्रार्थीकरणात् ।

प्रदरी चावशिष्टाध्वं पायसस्यामुतोपमम् ॥ 28  ॥



अनुचिन्त्य सुमित्रायै पुत्रेव महामति: 1

एवं तासां ददौ राजा भार्याणं पायसं पृथक् १ २९ १ १

Again he gave half of the rest to Kaikeyi and, reflecting awhile, the highly intelligent Daśaratha gave the other half of the nectar-like Pāyasa once more to Sumitrā. In this way the monarch apportioned the Pāyasa separately to all his aforementioned wives. (28-29)

ताङ्गे पायसं प्राय० नरेन्द्रस्योतमन्सिव्यः।

सम्मानं मेपिंरे सर्वा: प्रहषीदितचेतसः ॥ 30  ॥

All the aforesaid noble wives of the Emperor deemed this apportionment as a unique honour, their mind enlivened through excessive joy on receiving the Payasa.(30)

ततस्तुना: प्रार्थ तदुत्मासिव्यो महीपतेरुनतमयावसं पृथक्।

हुताशनादिव्यसमानतेजसोप्रिचेण गर्भान् प्रतिपेदिरे तदा ॥ 31  ॥

Partaking of the excellent Payasa separately the same moment, those noble wives of the Emperor actually felt before long by virtue of it the presence in their womb of offspring vying in splendour with the fire and the sun. (31)

ततनु राजा प्रतिविध्य ता: विषय: प्रक्रक्षभां: प्रतितम्यमानस: 1

वभूषा इट्थिविद्वे यथा शीर: सुरेन्सिद्धविणाणाधिपूरित: ॥ 32  ॥

Perceiving the aforesaid queens with offspring in their womb, quickened immediately afterwards, the Emperor, who had attained his desired object and was adored by Indra, the ruler of gods, and hosts of Siddhas and Rsis (as the future father of the divine Śri Rāma), felt delighted even as Indra does in heaven. (32)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पोडश: सर्ग: ॥ 16  ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixteen in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmīki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

समदर्श: सर्ग:

Canto XVII

Birth of monkey chiefs from the loins of different gods under the directions of Brahmā

पुत्रलं तु गते विद्यो राजस्तस्य महात्मन:।

उवाच देवता: सर्वा: स्वयम्भूर्भगवानिन्दम् ॥ 1  ॥

Lord Viṣṇu having all but assumed the role of sons to that high-souled monarch, King Dáśaratha, the almighty Brahmā (the self-born) commanded all the gods as follows: (1)

सत्यसंस्थ यीरस्य सर्वेषां नो हितैधिणः ।

विष्णो: सहायान् बलिनः सुजब्धे कामरूपिण: ॥ 2  ॥

"Beget mighty part manifestations of yourselves, capable of assuming any form at will and able to assist the valiant Lord Viṣṇu, who is true to His promise and wishes well of us all. (2)

मायाविदश्र शूरांश व्यावुवेगसमाझले।

नयज्ञान् बुद्धिस्मयज्ञान् विश्यणतुल्ययराकमान् ॥ 3  ॥

असंहायांनुपायज्ञान् दिव्यसंहननान्वितान् ।

स्वास्त्रियणसम्यज्ञान्मृततशगानाविव ॥ 4  ॥

अवसरस्सु च मुख्यासु गन्धवीर्णां तनूष च।

यक्षपन्नाकन्यासु ऋक्षविद्याधारीषु चा ॥ 5  ॥

किंनरीर्णां च गात्रेषु वानरीर्णां तनूष च।

सुजध्यं हरिरूकोण पुत्रांस्तुल्ययराकमान् ॥ 6  ॥

"Through the principal Apsarás (celestial nymphs), the wombs of Gandharva women, maidens of Yakṣas (a class of demigods, ruled over by Kubera) and Nāgas (serpent-demons credited with a human face and serpent-like lower body), she-bears and

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

Vidyadhara women, the wombs of female Kinnaras* and she-monkeys procreate sons in the form of monkeys, equal in strength to you, well-versed in conjuring tricks, gallant, swift as the wind in speed, expert in policy, gifted with intelligence, equal in prowess to Lord Vişnu, incapable of being killed by the enemy, conversant with various contrivances, endowed with an ethereal body, skilled in the use and withdrawal etc., of missiles and resembling the gods that feed on ambrosia. (3-6)

पूर्वमैव मया सृष्टो जाम्बवानुक्षुपंगवः।

जृष्यभाग्यस सहसा मम वक्यादजायत ॥ 7  ॥

“Jambavān, the chief of bears, has already been begotten by me. He issued forth from my mouth all of a sudden (even) as I was yawning.” (7)

ते तथोक्ता भगवता तत् प्रतिश्रून्य शासनम्।

जनयामासुरैवं ते पूत्रान् वानरक्षिपण: ॥ 8  ॥

Enjoined thus by Brahmā and accepting his aforesaid command, the above-mentioned gods as instructed begot sons in the form of monkeys. (8)

སྐཅསཕྱི མཆམཁན: སྐཅཞསྐཞསྐཞསྐཞསྐཞསྐཞསྐཞསྐཞསྐཞསྐཞ

Nay, high-souled Rsis, Siddhas, Vidyādharas (artists of heaven) and Nāgas and Čāranas (celestial bards) begot heroic sons belonging to the monkey class. (9)

वानरेन्द्र महेन्द्रधमिन्नो वालिनमात्मजम्।

सुग्रीवं जनयामास तपानस्तपातं वर:॥ 10  ॥

Indra, the ruler of gods, begot as his son Vāli, the ruler of monkeys, who vied with the great Indra himself. The sun-god, the foremost of those radiating heat, begot Sugriva, the younger brother of Vāli. (10)

सूर्यसित्स्वजनयत् तारं नाम महाकपिम्।

सर्ववानारमुख्यानां बुद्धिमन्तमनुत्नमम् ॥ 11  ॥

The sage Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods, begot the mighty monkey, Tāra, unsurpassed in intelligence among all the monkey chiefs. (11)

धनदस्य सुतः श्रीमान् वानरो ग्रन्थमादनः।

विश्वकर्मा खजजयन्नलं नाम महाकपिम्॥ 11  ॥

The glorious monkey Gandhamādana was an offspring of Kubera (the bestower of riches); while Viśwakarmā, the architect of gods, begot the mighty monkey named Nala. (12)

पावकस्य सुतः श्रीमान् नीलोजगिनसुदृष्णभः ।

तेजसा यशसा वीयांद्वतरित्यन्त वीयंवान् ॥ 13  ॥

The glorious and valiant Nila, a son of the fire-god, who vied in splendour with fire, outdid all in point of glory, renown and prowess. (13)

रूपद्रविणस्पम्नावक्षित्री रूपसम्पमती।

भैन्दं च द्विवदं चैव जनयामासु: स्वयम् ॥ 14  ॥

And the twin-gods, Aswinkumāras, who are esteemed for their comeliness and rich in the wealth of beauty, themselves begot Mainda as well as Dwivida. (14)

वरुणो जनयामास सूषेणं नाम वानरम्।

शरभं जनयामास पजंव्यस्तु महाबल: ॥ 15  ॥

Varuna, the god of water, begot the monkey named Suṣena; while the mighty Parjanya, the god of rain, begot Sarabha.(15)

माक्तस्योरस: श्रीमान् हनूमान् नाम वानरः।

वजसंहनापोते ते वैनतेयसमो जवे ॥ 16  ॥

The glorious monkey named Hanumān is the own son of the wind-god. He is endowed with a body invulnerable as the thunderbolt and vies with Garuda (son of Vinatā and the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu) in speed. (16)

सर्ववानरमुख्येषु बुद्धिमान् बलवानपि।

ते सृष्टा बहुसाहसा दर्शग्रीववधोशता: ॥ 17  ॥

* A class of demigods with a human figure and the head of a horse or with a horse's body and the head of a human being.

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

He is the cleverest and strongest of all monkey chiefs. They were begotten in many thousands and were ever ready to make short work of Ravana. (17)

अप्रमेयबला वीरा विकाना: कामरूपिण:।

ते गजाचलसंकाशा वपुमन्तो महाबला:॥ 168  ॥

They were valiant and full of prowess and possessed infinite strength. Mighty as they were, they could take any form at will, were endowed with gigantic bodies and looked like elephants and mountains. (18)

ऋक्षवानरगोपच्छा: क्षिप्रमेवाधिजित्र।

यस्य देवस्य यदूरं वेधो यश्य पराकमः ॥ 19  ॥

अजायत समं तेन तस्य तस्य पृथक् पृथक् ।

गोलाइगूलेषु चोत्यना: किंचिद्न्तविकामः ॥ 20  ॥

The bears, monkeys and long-tailed monkeys (lit., those with a tail resembling that of a cow) saw the light in no time after conception, as is the case with heavenly beings. The son of each god was individually born as on all fours with the complexion, bodily structure and prowess that the latter possessed; while those born among the long-tailed monkeys were endowed with a slightly superior prowess as compared even with their respective fathers. (19-20)

रक्षीषु च तथा जाता वानारः किनरीषु च।

देवा महर्शिण्यबलास्थ्ययशा सगस्विन: ॥ 21  ॥

नागाः किम्पुरुषाश्रैव सिद्धविद्धाश्रोगराः।

बह्वो जनयामासुह्ट्यन्तत्र सहस्ण: ॥ 22  ॥

Even so, monkeys were born of she-bears and Kinnara women. Many renowned gods, great Rṣis and Gandharvas, Garuda and others (sons of Kaśyapa) and Yakṣas, the elephants guarding the quarters and Kirnpuruṣas (a class of beings allied to the Kinnaras, who are regarded as the attendants of Kubera), Siddhas, Vidyādharas and Nāgas, full of delight, begot sons in thousands on that occasion. (21-22)

चारणाशु स्तान् वीरान् ससुजूर्नचारिन्:।

वानरान् सुमहाकायान् सर्वान् वे वनचारिण: ॥ 23  ॥

अमरससु च मुख्यासु तथा विदाधारीषु च।

नागकन्यासु च तदा नथर्वींणां तनूपु च।

कामकपबलोपिता यथाकामविचारिण: ॥ 24  ॥

Through the principal Apsarās and Vidyadhara women as well as through maidens of the Nāgas and the wombs of Gandharva women, the Čaranas too begot in the form of sons monkeys endowed with a gigantic body and roaming about in the forests and all living only on wild fruits etc. They were gifted with the power of assuming any form and acquiring any amount of strength at will and could go about wherever they liked. (23-24)

सिंहशान्दूलसूद्रा दर्पेण च बलेन च।

शिलाप्रहरणा: सर्वे सर्वे पर्वतयोधिनः ॥ 25  ॥

Nay, they resembled the lion and tiger in point of haughtiness and strength. All used even rocks as their missiles and all fought with mountains as their weapon.(25)

नखदंद्युधाः सर्वे सर्वे सर्वास्कोविदाः।

विचालनयेयुः शैलेन्ज्ञान भेदयेयुः स्थगग्न हुमान् ॥ 26  ॥

All had claws and teeth for their weapons and all were skilled in the use of all sorts of missiles. They could shake great mountains and cleave rooted trees. (26)

क्षोभयेयुध अवेन समूई सरितां पतिम्।

द्वारयेयुः क्षितिं पदृभ्यामपलवेयुभंहणपांचि। 27  ॥

They could agitate the sea, the lord of the rivers, with their impetuosity, rend the earth with their feet and leap across extensive oceans. (27)

नभस्तलं विशेयुध यूहीयुरिप तोयदान्।

गृहीयुरिप मातझन् मत्तान् प्रजजतो वने। 28  ॥

They could penetrate into the firmament and catch hold of the clouds. They could even seize elephants in rut roaming at will in the forest. (28)

नदमानांछ नाटेन पातयेयुविंहंगामन्।

ईदुशगांत प्रभूतानि हरीणां कामरूपिणाम्। 29  ॥



<table><tr><td>शर्त शतसह्वाशि वृक्षपानां महात्मनाम्।</td></tr><tr><td>ते प्रधानेषु वृधेषु हरीणां हरिव्यूधपा: ॥ 30  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>बभूवृदुंधपशेधान् वीरांश्जानयन् हरीन्।</td></tr><tr><td>अन्ये ऋक्षवतः प्रस्थानुपतस्थुः सहस्रश: ॥ 31  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>अन्ये नानाविश्याऊल्ना कानानपि च भोजिर।</td></tr><tr><td>सूर्यपुंत्र च सुरप्रीयं शकपुंत्र च वालिनम् ॥ 32  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>भातरावुपतस्थुसे सर्वे च हरियुधण:।</td></tr><tr><td>नले नील हनुमत्नमन्यांश हरियुधणम् ॥ 33  ॥</td></tr></table>

Nay, they could dash down with their yell crying birds. A crore of such high-souled monkeys, capable of assuming any form at will and able to lead herds of their kind, came to light. They turned out to be the leaders of separate herds of monkeys among their principal troops and begot other valiant monkeys who proved to be the foremost of generals. Others in their thousands resorted to the peaks of Mount Rksavan; still others sought various mountains and forests. All those monkey chiefs flocked round the two brothers, Sugriva, son of the sun-god, and Vâli, son of Indra, too; while others stood by the side of Nala, Nila, Hanumān and other monkey chiefs. (29-33)

ते ताश्यवलसम्पात्रा: सर्वे युद्धविशारादा:।

विचरन्तोदर्यन् सर्वान् सिंह्व्याप्रमहोरगान् ॥ 34  ॥

Endowed with the might of Garuda, they were all skilled in warfare and, while roaming about, killed all lions, tigers and big snakes and other wild animals (that confronted them). (34)

महावलो महाबाहुवर्ती विपुलविक्रमः ।

जुगोप भूजवीयैण ऋक्षगोपच्छवानग्न।   ॥ ३५ ॥

The mighty and stout-armed Vāli, who possessed extraordinary prowess, protected with the might of his arms the aforesaid bears, monkeys and long-tailed monkeys. (35)

हैरियं पृथिवी शूरैः सपर्वतवनार्णवा ।

कौर्णा विविधसंस्थानैर्नानाव्यजनलक्षणे: ॥ 36  ॥

This globe with all its mountains, forests and oceans was overrun by the above-mentioned heroes of diverse bodily structures and distinguished by various characteristic marks. (36)

नैमेवपुद्वाचलकूटसर्निभैमेहावलैवनरयूधाप्रधिधे: । बभूत भूभीमशरीरहपै: समावृता रामसहायहेतो: ।   ।३७ ।।

The earth was filled with those mighty leaders of monkey chiefs, who looked like a mass of clouds or like mountain-peaks and were endowed with a fearful body and aspect and had been born only to assist Śri Rama. (37)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे ससदश: सर्प: ॥ 17  ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventeen in the Balakanda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टादश: सर्गे:

Canto XVIII

Advent of Śri Rāma, Bharata and others; festivities in heaven as well as in Ayodhya; their investiture with the sacred thread; the arrival of Viśwāmitra

निर्वृते तु कती तस्मिन् हयमेधे महात्मनः ।

प्रतिगृहासरा भागान् प्रतिजमृद्यांशानम् ॥ 1  ॥

The celebrated Aśwamedha sacrifice, as well as that intended to procure male progeny, performed by the high-souled

Emperor, having been concluded, the immortals, who personally attended it, returned even as they had come, after receiving their respective shares of the offerings made in the sacrifices. (1)



<table><tr><td colspan="2">सभासदीक्षानियम: पत्तौगणसमवित्त: 1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">प्रविवेश पूर्ति राजा सम्भुवलवाहन: 11 2 11</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Having completed the sacred vow of chastity etc., taken at the time of consecration, the king proceeded towards his capital accompanied by his wives and alongwith his servants, army and conveyances. (2)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">यथाई पूजितास्तेन राजा च पृथिवीधश: 1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">मुदिताः प्रययुदेशान् प्रणाथ्य मुनिपुंगवम्. 13 3 11</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Having been honoured according to their respective rank by the Emperor, who had just concluded his sacrificial performances, the kings too that had assembled for the sacrifice, returned full of delight to their territories bowing low to Vasísha, Rysaśrīnga, Vamadeva and others (the foremost of sages). (3)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">श्रीमतां गच्छतां तेषां स्वगृहाणि पुरात् ततः 1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">बलानि राजां शुभ्राणि प्रह्यानि चकाशिरे ॥ 4  ॥</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Clad in a white uniform (presented by the Emperor) and greatly delighted, the troops of those glorious kings, even as the latter proceeded to their respective homes from that city of Ayodhyā, shone brightly. (4)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">गतेषु पृथिवीशेषु राजा दशरथः पुनः 1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">प्रविश्व शुर्गी श्रीमान् पुरस्कृत्य द्विजोत्नान् ॥ 5  ॥</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">The kings having dispersed, the glorious King Dásaratha, who had gone out in state to see them off, entered the city once more, placing the foremost of Brāhmanas, Vasistha and others, ahead of all. (5)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">शात्ञा प्रययौ साध्यम्यश्रूः: सुपूजितः।</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">अनुगम्यमानो राजा च सानुयाजेण धीमता ॥ 6  ॥</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Duly honoured and being followed (to some distance) by the wise king with his entourage, Rīṣyaśrṇa too departed with his wife, Śantā. (6)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">एवं विसुच्य तान् सर्वान् राजा स्मयूर्णमानसः।</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">उवास सुरक्षितसत्र पुत्रोयसिं विचित्रन्ति ॥ 7  ॥</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Having thus sent away all of them, and</td></tr></table>

fully realized his ambition of performing a horse-sacrifice, the king dwelt happily in his own capital, eagerly awaiting the birth of sons (to him). (7)

ततो यजे समासे तु ऋतृनां घट् समत्यु:।

ततश्र द्वार्शे मासे चेत्रे नावमिके तिथी ॥ 8  ॥

नक्षत्रे प्रतितिदेवलये स्योच्चसंथेषु पझसु।

गहेषु ककंटे लनने वाक्यताविन्दुना सह ॥ 9  ॥

प्रोघ्याने जगत्राशं सर्वलोकनमस्कृतम् ।

कौसल्याजनयद् रामं दिव्यलक्षणसंयुतम् ॥ 1 0  ॥

विषणोर्धर्य महाभागां पुत्रमैक्ष्वाकुनन्दनम्।

लोहिताखं महाबाहु रत्नोष्टं दुर्नुभिवस्वनम् ॥ 11  ॥

In the meantime six seasons, each consisting of two months, rolled away after the sacrifice was over. Then on the ninth lunar day of the bright fortnight of Caitra, the twelfth month after the conclusion of the sacrifices when the asterism Punarvasu (presided over by Aditi) was in the ascendant and as many as five planets (viz., the Sun, Mars, Saturn, Jupiter and Venus) happened to be exalted (appeared in the zodiacal signs of Meṣa or Aries, Makara or Capricornus, Tulā or Libra, Karka or Cancer and Mina or Pisces respectively) and Jupiter in conjunction with the Moon appeared in the zodiacal sign of Karka, mother Kausalyā, the eldest wife of Dásaratha, gave birth to a highly blessed son, named Śri Rāma, who was no other than the Lord of the universe, the adored of all the three worlds, the delight of Ikṣwāku's race, who represented one-half of Lord Viṣṇu and was endowed with auspicious divine marks in that he had eyes tinged with red, possessed exceptionally long arms and ruddy lips and a voice resembling the sound of a kettledrum.

(8-11)

क्रीसल्या श्रूर्णुभे तेन पुत्रेणामिततेजसा।

यथा वरेण देवानामदितिवर्जपाणिना ॥ 12  ॥

Kausalyā shone brightly with that son possessed of immense glory even as Aditi, the mother of gods, with Indra, the



wielder of a thunderbolt, the foremost of gods. (12)

भरतो नाम कैकैय्यां जउे सत्यपराकमः।

साक्षात् विष्णोश्रतुभर्गः सर्वै: सपूदितो गुणैः ॥ 13  ॥

Next, through the womb of Kaikeyi, the youngest wife of King Dásaratha, was born Bharata, possessed of true valour, who actually represented a quarter of Lord Viṣṇu and was adorned with all divine virtues. (13)

अथ लक्ष्मणश्रुज्नी सुमित्राजनयत् सुतो।

वीरौ सर्वीरक्षुरश्लो विष्णोरध़समित्विति ॥ 14  ॥

Sumitrā, the second wife of King Daśaratha, then gave birth to two (twin) sons, Laksmana and Śatrughna, both valiant and skilled in the use of all kinds of missiles and jointly representing a portion one-sixth of Lord Viṣnu. (14)

पुथे जातसु भरतो मौनलनप्रे प्रसबधीः। सापै जातो तु सौमित्री कुलीरे ५भ्युदिते रची ॥ 15  ॥

Bharata of cheerful mind was born when the constellation Puṣya was in the ascendant and the Sun had entered the zodiacal sign of Pisces; while the twin sons of Sumitrā were born when the constellation Śālesā was in the ascendant and the sun had reached the meridian, touching the zodiacal sign of Karka (Cancer). (15)

राजः पुरा महात्यनश्रवारो जज्ञरे पृथक् ।

गृणवली3नुरूपाश्र छन्या प्रोष्यदोपमाः ॥ 16  ॥

The four high-souled sons of the Emperor were born separately, though identical in essence. Endowed with transcendental virtues, they all resembled one another and vied with the four stars comprising the constellations Pūrvā Bhadrapadā and Uttarā Bhadrapadā in splendour. (16)

जगु: कलं च गध्यर्वा ननृतुशापसोपगणा: । देववुद्धुभयो नेदु: पुणवृष्टिश्छ खात् पतत् ॥ 17  ॥

The Gandharvas sang melodiously and bevies of Apsarás (celestial nymphs) danced; nay, the kettledrums of the gods sounded of their own accord and a shower of flowers dropped from the heavens. (17)

उत्सवछ महानासीदोध्यायां जनाकुल:।

रथ्याङ्र जनसम्बाधा नटनतक्सेकुला: ॥ 18  ॥

There was great rejoicing marked with crowds of men in Ayodhyā. Nay, the streets got crowded with actors and dancers and were marked with a great rush of men. (18)

गायनैछ विराविणये वादनैछ तथापरे:।

विरेजुर्विपुलासतत्र सर्वरत्समवित्वा: ॥ 19  ॥

The extensive roads in Ayodhyā, which were noisy with the sound of songsters and those who played on musical instruments as well as with that of others such as the chanters of the Vedas, minstrels, bards and panegyristes and were strewn with all kinds of precious stones (thrown by the people in order to signify their admiration for their songs etc.), presented a gala appearance. (19)

प्रदेशांश्र ददौ राजा सुतमागधविन्दनाम्।

ब्राहणीयोये ददौ विनं गोधवानि सहस्रश: ॥ 20  ॥

The king bestowed presents worth giving on the ballad-singers, bards and panegyrists and gave away riches and cows in thousands to Brāhmanas. (20)

अतीलैकादशाहं तु नामकर्म तथाकरोत्।

चेच्छं रामं महात्मानं भरतं कैकवीसुतम् ॥ 21  ॥

सौमित्रि लक्ष्मणमिति श्रतुभमपरं तथा ।

वसिष्ठ: परमप्रीते नामानि कुरते तदा ॥ 22  ॥

He further performed the naming ceremony with respect to his sons on completing eleven* days (after the birth of

* The Śruti says:

क्षतियस्य द्वारणहं सृतकम्।

"The impurity of a Kṣatriya, occasioned by childbirth, lasts for twelve days." And a Smṛti text says: जयोद्धरो रालं नामकरणन् (The naming ceremony of Kṣatriya boys takes place on the thirteenth day).



Lakṣmana and Śatrughna or thirteen days after the advent of Śri Rāma, which took place two days earlier). Supremely delighted the sage Vasiṣṭha, on behalf of the king, made the eldest, an embodiment of the Supreme Spirit, known by the name of 'Rāma', the son of Kaikeyī by that of 'Bharata', the first son of Sumitrā by that of Lakṣmana and the other by that of Śatrughna on that occasion. (21-22)

ब्राह्माणन भोजवामास पौरजानपदानपि।

अददद् ब्राह्मणानां च रलीभयमलं बढ़ ॥ 23  ॥

The sage, on behalf of the Emperor, fed the Brāhmanas of the capital as well as of the entire kingdom of Kosala and gave away to the said Brāhmaṇas a large heap of shining jewels. (23)

तेषां जन्मक्रियादीनि सर्वकर्मायकरावर।।

तेषां केतुरिव ज्येषो रामो रतिकर: पितु: ॥ 24  ॥

He further caused to be performed from time to time with respect to the four princes all purificatory rites commencing from the Jātakarma and ending with Upananyana or investiture with the sacred thread. The eldest of them, Śri Rāma, proclaimed the greatness of his race like a flag and proved to be the delight of his father. (24)

बभूव भूयो भूतानां स्वयभूरिव सम्मतः।

सर्वे वेदविदः शूरा: सर्वे लोकहिते रता: ॥ 25  ॥

Again, he was esteemed by all created beings as Brahmā, the self-born. All the four princes turned out to be masters of the Vedas and great heroes, and all were intent upon doing good to the people. (25)

सर्वे ज्ञानोपसम्पन्नः सर्वे समुदिता गुणे:।

तेन्यापि महतैना रामः सत्यपत्रकमः ॥ 26  ॥

All were endowed with wisdom and all were adorned with virtues. Śri Rāma, however, was exceptionally glorious of them all and possessed of true, unfailing prowess.

(26)

इष्टः सर्वस्य लोकस्य शशगढ़़ इव निर्मलः ।

गजस्क्ये3शुपूषे च रथचर्यासु सम्मतः ॥ 27  ॥

Like the full moon in a clear sky, he was the beloved of all people and was esteemed in the art of riding on elephants and on horseback and in the various processes of driving a chariot. (27)

धनुर्वैदे च निरतः पितु: शुष्णवणे रतः ।

बाल्यात् प्रभुति सुरिन्णयो लक्ष्मणो लक्ष्मवधनः ॥ 28  ॥

रामस्य लोकारमस्य भातु-्यैष्ठस्य निलशः ।

सर्वप्रियकरस्तस्य रामस्यापि शरितः ॥ 29  ॥

लक्ष्मणो लक्ष्मसम्प्यो बहिःप्राण इवापरः ।

न च तेन विना निरां लभते पुरुषोतमः ॥ 30  ॥

मृष्ममसूपपानीतमश्नाति नहि तं विना।

यदा हि हयमारूढो मृगयं याति राघव: ॥ 31  ॥

अर्थंने पृष्ठतो3प्येति सधनुः परिपालनम् ।

भरतस्यापि शजुर्णो लक्ष्मणावरजो हि सः ॥ 32  ॥

प्राणै: प्रियततो रिनयं तस्य चासीन्त तथा प्रियः ।

स चतूर्भिमंहाभानै: पुरैदैर्शग्रथ: प्रिये: ॥ 33  ॥

बभूव परमप्रीतो देवैरिवि पितामहः ।

ते यदा ज्ञानस्प्यन्तः सर्वे समुदिता गुणैः ॥ 34  ॥

ह्रीमन्तः कर्जितमन्तश्र सर्वेज्ञा दीर्घदर्शिनः ।

तेषामेवं प्रभावाणां सर्वेधां दीसंतेजसाम् ॥ 35  ॥

पिता दारशयो हृटो ब्रह्मा लोकाधियो यथा।

ते चापि मनुज्याम्रा वैदिकाध्ययने रतः ॥ 36  ॥

पितृसुश्रूषणरता धनुवैदे च निष्ठतः ।

अथ राजा दरशयत्नें दारकिंगां प्रति ॥ 37  ॥

चित्तयामास धर्मात्मा सोपाध्याय: सबान्धव: ।

तस्य चित्तयामानस्य मन्चमध्ये महात्मनः ॥ 38  ॥

अभ्यागच्छम्हतेजा विश्वामिजो महापुनि: ।

स राजा दर्शनाकाङ्क्षी द्वाराध्यक्षानुवाच ह ॥ 39  ॥

He took delight in the science of archery and was devoted to the service of his father. Laksmana, the promoter of fortune of those who sought his protection, was ever deeply attached from his very infancy to his eldest brother, Śri Rāma, the delight of the world. He gratified the latter in every way. Laksmana, who was rich in splendour, was a second life, as it were, to Śri Rāma,

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

moving outside his body. Without him Śri Rāma, the foremost of men, did not have even a wink of sleep, nor did he partake of a dainty dish brought for him without Lakṣmana. Whenever Śri Rāma, the celebrated sion of Raghu, went out a-hunting, mounted on horseback, Lakṣmana forthwith followed at his heels, armed with a bow and arrows and guarding him on all sides. Śatrughna, the younger brother of Lakṣmana, was dearer to Bharata even than the latter's own life and Bharata likewise was ever dear to Śatrughna.

The said King, Dásaratha, felt supremely delighted with his four highly blessed and beloved sons as Brahmā, the progenitor of the entire creation, with the gods viz., Indra, Varuna, Yama and Kubera presiding over the four quarters. When they got enriched with wisdom, they were all adorned with virtues. Nay, they were modest, glorious, all-knowing and far-sighted. King Dásaratha, the father of them all—who were possessed of such unique glory and luminous splendour—felt rejoiced as Brahma, the ruler of the universe. Those tigers among men too were attached to their Vedic studies, nay, devoted to the service of their parents, and were well-versed in the science of archery.

Now, when their studies neared completion, King Dásaratha, whose mind was given to piety, deliberated with his family priests, the sages Vasiṣṭha and Vāmadeva, and relations, such as King Romapāda, about the princes' marriage. Even while that high-souled monarch was deliberating on the subject in the midst of his counsellors, the great sage Viswāmitra, who was possessed of unique glory, arrived at the palace of King Dásaratha. Seeking an audience with the king, he addressed the gate-keepers as follows: (28-39)

शीप्रभाछात मां प्रातं कौशिकं गाधिन: सूनम्।

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य राजो वेशम प्रदूरुः।। 40  ॥

सभानतमनसः सर्वे तेन वाक्येन चोदिताः ।

ते गत्वा राजभवनं विश्वामिनमृषिं तदा ॥ 41  ॥

प्राममावेदयामासुनैपायेश्वाकवे तदा ।

तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा सपुरोधाः समाहितः ॥ 42  ॥

प्रत्युजगाम संहष्टो ब्रह्णापमिव वासवः ।

स दूद्वा ज्वलितं दीप्या तापसं संशितबनम् ॥ 43  ॥

प्रहुष्वदन्तो राजा ततो3ल्यमुपहारयत्।

स राज: प्रतिगृह्यार्थे शास्वदूलेन कर्मणा ॥ 44  ॥

कुशलं चाव्ययं चैव पर्यप्छघराशायम्।

पुरे कोलेजे जनपदे बाब्वेवपु सुहत्नु च। 45  ॥

कुशलं कौशिको राज: पर्यप्छन्त सुयामिकः ।

अधि ते संनता: सर्वे सामन्तरिपवो जिता: ॥ 46  ॥

"Inform the king about me, the sage Viśwāmitra belonging to the line of Kuśa, the son of Gādhi, having arrived at his door." Hearing the aforesaid utterance of the sage and spurred on by that command, all of them ran fast to the king's apartments with an awe-stricken mind. Reaching the royal apartments at once, they forthwith reported to King Daśaratha (belonging to the line of Ikśwāku) the news of the sage Viśwāmitra having arrived at the portals. Overjoyed to hear the aforesaid statement of theirs, the king, full of devotion, went forth to receive him alongwith his family priest, Vasiṣṭha, even as Indra would go to meet Brahmā.

Seeing the hermit of austere vows and shining with effulgence, the king with a most cheerful countenance thereupon offered to him water to wash his hands with. Accepting the water for washing the hands with and other attentions offered by the king with ceremony, as enjoined by the scriptures, he duly inquired of the king after his health and prosperity. The exceedingly pious sage Viśwāmitra also duly inquired after the welfare of the king's capital, treasury, kingdom, relations and friends. He then said, "I hope all your vassals—are fully submissive to you and your enemies subdued. (40-46)



दैवं च मानुषं चैव कर्मे ते साध्वनृष्टितम्।

वसिष्ठं च समाग्य कुशलं मुनिपुंगव: ॥ 47  ॥

त्रश्पैंश तान् यथान्यां महाभाग उवाच ह।

ते सवे हृष्टमनसतस्य राजो निवेशनम् ॥ 48  ॥

विविष्य: पूजितासतेन निविद्युं यथाहतं: ।

अथ हृष्टमना राजा विश्वामित्र महामुनिन् ॥ 49  ॥

उवाच परमोदारो हृष्टसामिभूजवन् ।

यथामृतस्य सम्प्रामिरयां वर्षेन्नूदके ॥ 50  ॥

यथा सदूशदोरेषु पुत्रजन्माप्रजस्य बै।

प्रणटस्य यथा ताभो यथा हर्षों महोद्यः ॥ 51  ॥

तथैवागमर्त मन्ये स्वागतं ते महामुने।

कं च ते परमं कामं करोमि किमु हर्षितः ॥ 52  ॥

And are your duties like pouring oblations into the fire in relation to gods and human beings (newcomers) duly discharged?" Nay, meeting (embracing) in the proper order of sequence Vasistha and those other seers, Vamadeva and so on, who were present there, he inquired after their welfare: so the tradition goes. Delighted in mind, they all then entered the court of the celebrated king (Daśaratha) and, received with attentions by him, took their seat according to their respective rank. Thrilled with joy the highly magnanimous king then spoke with a delighted mind to the great sage Viśwāmitra, glorifying him as follows: "I consider your advent precisely as welcome as securing nectar in one's own hands, as rainfall in a waterless tract, as the actual birth of a son, through a wife becoming oneself, to one without a child, as the recovery of a treasure irretrievably lost, or joy proceeding from a festive occasion, O great sage ! I wonder what supreme object of your desire I can delightfully accomplish and how! (47-52)

पात्रभृतोसि मे ब्रह्मृ दिष्ट्या प्रासोसि मानत।

अद्य मे सफलं जन्म जीवित च सुजीवित्य।। 53  ॥

“You are deserving of every service from me and have called at my place through my good luck, O bestower of honour! My birth stands fulfilled and my life is blessed today. (53)

यस्माद् विप्रेन्रमत्रश्रं सुप्रभाता निशगा मम।

पूर्वै राजार्थिश्बदेन तपसा ट्रोतितप्रभः ॥ 54  ॥

ब्रहार्थित्वमनुप्रामः पूर्णोर्जस बहुधा मया ।

तद्द्रुदतमभूद् विष प्रविंत्र परमं मम ॥ 55  ॥

"My night has culminated in a propitious sunrise in that I have seen the foremost of Brahmanas in you. Formerly distinguished by the appellation ‘Rājarsī’ (a royal sage), you have since earned the status of a Brahmarsī (Brāhmana sage), your splendour having been brightened by your asceticism. You are thus worthy of adoration to me in many ways. Your visit to me has been wonderful in that it has proved to be highly purifying for me, O Brahmana sage !(54-55)

शुभक्षेजगतश्रहं तव संदर्भनात् प्रभो ।

ब्रहि यत् प्रार्थितं तुभ्यं कार्यमायामं प्रति ॥ 56  ॥

इच्छाम्यनुगृहितोर्ड त्वदर्थे परिवृद्धये ।

कार्यस्य न विमर्शं च गन्तमहिंस सूत्रत ॥ 57  ॥

"Nay, by virtue of your very sight, O lord, I have visited all sacred places. Pray, tell me what object is sought to be accomplished by you through your advent to my capital. Favoured by you, I wish to promote your cause. You need not entertain any doubt about the success of your mission, O sage of noble vows! (56-57)

कर्ता चाहमशेषेण देतेत हि भवान् मम।

मम चायमनुग्रासो महानभ्युदयो हिज।

तवागमनज: कृत्नो धर्मश्रानुत्तमो हिज ॥ 58  ॥

“I shall fully accomplish your object; for being an honoured guest, you are a veritable god to me. This is an occasion for great rejoicing come to me, as well as to my family O Brāhmaṇa sage, and the highest religious merit proceeding from your visit has fallen to my lot in its entirety, O holy one!” (58)

इति हृदयसुर्षे निश्णय वाक्यं श्रुतिसुखामावता विनीतामुक्तम् ।

प्रथितनुगणयशा गुणीविशिष्ट: परमत्रश्रिध: परमं जगाम हर्षेम् ॥ 59  ॥

The great sage Viswāmitra, whose renown occasioned by his excellences had spread far and wide and who was



distinguished by his virtues, experienced supreme delight on hearing the aforesaid prayer, which was not only pleasing to the

heart but also to the ears, addressed as it was in polite words by the high-souled monarch. (59)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीचे आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेउर्धादश: सर्प: ॥ 18  ॥

Thus ends Canto Eighteen in the Bâlakāndā of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

एकोनविंश: सर्प:

Canto XIX

King Dasaratha is stunned to hear the request of Viśwāmitra to send Śri Rāma with him to dispose of the Rākṣasas that interfered with his sacred observances

तच्छुला राजसिंहस्य वाक्यमद्धृतविस्तरम्।

हूटरीमा महातेजा विश्वामित्रोःभ्यभाषत ॥ 1  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid address of Dasáaratha (a lion among kings), marked with uncommon length, the highly glorious sage Viśwāmitra replied as follows, his hair standing on end: (1)

सदूर्ग राजशादूल तवैव भृवि नान्यतः।

महावंशप्रमुतस्य वसिष्ठव्यपदोशन: ॥ 2  ॥

"What you have said is worthy of you alone and of none else on earth, O tiger among kings—you, who are descendant of a great pedigree and enjoy the proud privilege of being instructed by the sage Vasiṣṭha! (2) यत् तु मे द्वरृतं वाय्वं तस्य कार्यस्य निश्रयम्।

कुरुच्य राजशार्तूल भव सत्यप्रतिश्रव: ॥ 3  ॥

"Make a resolve, O tiger among kings, to accomplish the purpose which stands foremost in my heart, and which is just going to be expressed in so many words, and thereby prove true to your promise (made in verse 58 of the foregoing canto). (3)

अहं नियममातिचे सिद्धार्थं पुरुषर्षभ।

तस्य विध्नकारी इति तु ग्राससौ कामारूपिणी ॥ 4  ॥

"I stand consecrated for a sacrificial

performance for the realization of my aim, O jewel among men! Two ogres, capable of taking any form at will, interrupt the said performance in conjunction with their associates. (4)

त्रते तु बहुगश्छीणं समाप्तवां ग्राससाविमो।

मारीचश्र सुबाहुश वीयवन्ती सुशिश्रितो || ५. || तौ मांसरभिशरीयोग वैदिं तामथ्यवर्षताम्।

अवशूते तथापृते तस्मिन्वियमग्रशे || ६. || कृतश्रमो निकलाहरतसमाद् देशादपाकम् ।

न च मे क्रोधमुत्स्टूं बुद्धिपविति पार्थिव || ७ ||

"Towards its conclusion, when the sacred observance had been gone through in a large measure, however, these two notorious Rākṣasas, Mārica and Subāhu, who are not only possessed of great prowess but are highly trained in the methods of warfare, polluted the sacrificial altar with a large volume of flesh and blood dropped from the airspace. My vow in connection with that sacred observance, which had well-nigh been completed as aforesaid, having thus been interrupted, I came away dispirited from that region, having achieved nothing beyond fruitless exertion. And there is no prompting in me to give vent to my wrath in the form of an execration, O ruler of the earth! (5-7)



तथाप्नता हि सा चर्यां न शाप्सतत्र मुच्यते।

स्वपूरं राजशादूलं रामं सत्यपराक्रमम्।। 8 ।।।

काकपक्षधरं वीरं ज्येच्छं मे दातुमहसि।

शक्तो हंघ मया गुमो दिव्येन स्वेन तेजसा।। 9 ।।

राक्षसा ये विकातरिस्तेबामपि विनाशनों।

श्रयश्रामै पद्रास्यामि बहूलपं न संशय:। 10 ।।

त्रयाणामपि लोकानां येन ख्वाति गाथव्यति।

न च तो गरमासादा शक्तो स्थातुं कथंचना।। 11 ।।

"For such is the character of that observance: no execation can be uttered in the course of it. Be pleased, therefore, to place at my disposal, O tiger among kings, your eldest and heroic son, Śri Rāma, who is possessed of true and unfailing prowess though yet a boy (adorned with side-locks of hair hanging over the temples after the fashion of the day). For, by virtue of his own transcendent glory and guarded by me, he is equal even to the extermination of all ogres that act in a hostile manner. Nay, I shall confer on him manifold boons whereby he will attain fame in all the three worlds: there is no doubt about it. And on coming face to face with Śri Rāma the two ogres cannot stand in any case. (8-11)

न च तो रायवाद्यो हन्तुमूलहते पुमान्।

वीर्यौलिस्तौ हि तो पापौ कालपाशवर्ष गतौ ॥ 12  ॥

रामस्य राजसाहूत्न न पयोंमौ महात्मन: ।

न च पुत्रगतं स्नेहं कतुर्महैस पार्थिव ॥ 13  ॥

“Nor can any man other than Rāma (a scion of Raghu) kill them. The two wicked fellows, who are proud of their prowess and have been caught in the noose of Death, are surely no match for the high-souled Rāma. You should not, therefore, allow your parental affection to prevail, O ruler of the earth! (12-13)

अहं ते प्रतिज्ञानामि हृती तो विद्धि राक्षसो।

अहं वेथि महात्मानं रामं सत्यपराक्रमम् ॥ 14  ॥

"I give you my word for it: take you the two ogres as killed. I know the high-souled Rāma as possessed of true, unfailing prowess. (14)

वसिष्ठोप्रि महातेजा ये चेमे तपसि सिधाता:।

यदि ते धर्मलाभं तु यशश्र परमं भूवि ॥ १५. ॥

सिधरमिच्छसि राजेन्द्र रामं मे दातुमहंसि।

यदाध्यन्तुर्जा काकुत्स्थ ददते तव मन्चिण: ॥ १६. ॥

वसिष्ठप्रमुखा: सर्वे ततो रामं विसर्जय।

अधिप्रेतमसंस्कृतमार्जं दातुमहंसि ॥ १७. ॥

दशरारं हि यजस्य रामं राजीवलोचनम्।

नात्येति कालो यजस्य यथांगं मम पत्रव ॥ १८. ॥

तथा कुरुच्य भर्ते ते मा च शोके मन: कुक्षा:।

इत्येवमुक्त्वा धर्माता धर्मार्थसहितं वच: ॥ १९. ॥

विरराम महातेजा विश्वाधिमत्रो महामति: ।

स तिश्रग्णय राजेन्द्रो विश्वाधिमवच: शुभम् ॥ २०. ॥

शोकेन महता सविष्टर्षचाला च मुमोह च ।

लब्धससंसदोर्थाय व्यथीदत भयान्वित: ॥ २१. ॥

"The highly glorious sage Vasiṣṭha and all these who stand vowed to asceticism also know him as such. If at all you seek the acquisition of religious merit as well as the highest renown for you on earth for all time to come, O king of kings, be pleased to make over Rāma to me. If all your counsellors with the sage Vasiṣṭha as their leader give their consent to you, O scion of Kakutsha (Purañjana), then let Rāma go with me. Be pleased to hand over to me your beloved son, the lotus-eyed Rama, who being grown up is no longer deeply attached (to you) for a period of ten days and nights only in the interests of my sacrifice. Act in such a way as to ensure that the period of my sacrificial performance is not exceeded, O scion of Raghu, and do not plunge your mind in grief. May good betide you!" Having uttered these words, full of piety and truth, the highly intelligent sage Viśwāmitra, whose mind is given to righteousness and who is possessed of extraordinary glory, became silent. Obsessed with excessive grief to hear that righteous request of Viśwāmitra, the said emperor trembled and fainted, too. Regaining his consciousness later on, he got up and became sad, seized as he was with fear of losing his eldest son. (15-21)

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

इति हृदयमनोविदारणं मुनिवचनं तदतीव शुध्यान्।

नरपतिभवमहान् महात्मा व्यक्षितमना: प्रचाल चासन्त।   ॥ २२ ॥

The great king, magnanimous though he was, felt afflicted in mind even as he

heard the aforesaid request of the sage, which was extremely agonizing to the heart and the mind, and he thus fell down unconscious from his seat. (22)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकार्डे एकोनविश्र: सर्ग: ॥ 11  ॥

Thus ends Canto Nineteen in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

विश्र: सर्ग:

Canto XX

Daśaratha shows disinclination to part with Śri Rāma, thereby enraging Viśwāmitra

तच्छुला राजशादूलैं विश्वामित्रस्य भाषितम्।

मुहूर्तीमिव निससंज्ञ: संज्ञावानिदमब्रवीत् ॥ 1  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid request of Viswāmitra, Daśaratha, a veritable tiger among kings, remained senseless, as it were, for an hour or so and, regaining his consciousness (afterwards), spoke as follows: (1)

ऊनपोडणवपों मे रामो राजीवलोचन: ।

न युद्धोययतामस्य पश्यामि सह राजसरे: ॥ 2  ॥

"My lotus-eyed Rāma is less than sixteen years old yet. I, therefore, do not perceive his capacity to contend with the Rāksasas. (2)

इयमक्षीहणी सेना यस्याहं पतिरीश्वर: ।

अनया सहितो गत्वा योद्राहं तैर्निशारे: ॥ 3  ॥

"Here is my army, one Aksauhini* strong, whose maintainer and controller am I. Marching with it, I shall personally wage war with those ogres. (3)

इमे श्रूराश्र विज्ञाना भूत्वा मेउस्विश्रारदा: । योम्या रक्षोगणेयौद्युं न रामं नेतुमहंसि ॥ 4  ॥

"These heroic and valiant retainers of mine are all skilled in the use of missiles and other weapons and are capable of

fighting with hosts of ogres. But you should not take away Rama. (4)

अहमेव धनुप्याणिगीमा समरभूधनि।

यावत् प्राणाभ्रश्च्यामि तावशोत्ये निश्चारेः ॥ 5  ॥

"I shall myself guard your sacrifice, bow in hand, and shall contend with the Rāksasas in the van of a battle so long as I breathe. (5)

निर्विचा तदाचर्या सा भविष्यति सुरक्षिता।

अहं तत्र गमिष्यामि न रामं नेतुमहींसि ॥ 6  ॥

"Fully guarded by me, the pursuit of the aforesaid observance by you will be rid of all obstacles; for I shall go thither in person. You should not, therefore, take away Rama. (6)

बालो हुकतविद्धु न च वेत्ति बलावलम्।

न चास्वलसंयुक्तो न च युद्धविशराद: ॥ 9  ॥

"A child yet and untrained in the science of warfare, he cannot estimate the strength or weakness of the enemy. He is neither equipped with the powerful missiles and other weapons, nor skilled in warfare. (7)

न चासौ रक्षसा योयनः कूटयुद्धा हि राक्षसा:।

विपयुक्तो हि रामेण मुद्धत्मपि नोत्सह ॥ 8  ॥

* An Akṣauhīnī consists of 21,870 elephants, an equal number of chariots, 65,610 horses and 109,350 foot.



<table><tr><td>जीवितुं मुनिशार्डूल न रामं नेतुमहसि।</td></tr><tr><td>यदि वा राधवं ब्रह्न् नेतुमिच्छसि सुजत १ १ १</td></tr><tr><td>चतुरुंसमायुक्ते मया सह च तं नय।</td></tr><tr><td>षचिव्वंसहस्वाधिग जातस्य मम कोशिका १ १० १</td></tr><tr><td>कुच्छेणोत्यादितश्रयं न रामं नेतुमहसि।</td></tr><tr><td>चतुणीमात्मजानां हि प्रीति: परमिका माम १ ११ १</td></tr><tr><td>न्येछे धर्मधाने च न रामं नेतुमहसि।</td></tr><tr><td>किं वीर्याँ राक्षसाते च कस्य पुत्राश्र के चे ते १ १२ १</td></tr><tr><td>कर्थ प्रमाणा: के चेतान्र रक्षिति मुनिपुंगव।</td></tr><tr><td>कर्थ च प्रतिकर्तव्य तेर्थ रामेण रक्षसामा १ १३ १</td></tr><tr><td>मामकैवर्ग बलैब्रंहान् मया वा कूटयोधिनाम्।</td></tr><tr><td>सर्वे मे शंस भगवन् कर्थ तेर्था मया राणे १ १४ १</td></tr><tr><td>स्थानल्यं दुट्भाबानां वीयौंस्सका हि राक्षसा:।</td></tr><tr><td>तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा विश्वामिजो5भ्यभाषित् १ १५ ॥</td></tr></table>

"Besides he is no match for the Rāksasas; for the ogres are given to treacherous fighting. Disunited from Rāma, I cannot really survive even for an hour or so, O tiger among ascetics! You should not, therefore, take away Rāma. If, on the other hand, you are keen to take him (a scion of Raghu), O Brāhmaṇa of noble vows, take him with me as well as with my army consisting of four parts, viz., elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry. Sixty millennia have elapsed since I was born, O Viśwāmitra (born in the line of King Kuśa) and this boy has been begotten with such hardship at this ripe old age. You ought not, therefore, to take away Rāma. Of all the four sons my supreme affection is truly speaking fastened on the eldest, in whom piety is predominant. Hence you ought not to take away Rāma. Of what prowess are those Rākṣasas, and whose sons are they? Again, who are they (by name) and of what size? Nay, who protect them and how can resistance be offered to those Rākṣasas, given as they are to treacherous fighting, by Rāma or my forces or by myself, O holy Brāhmana? Tell me everything, O venerable sage! What position should be taken up by me on the

battlefield opposite to those ogres of wicked intent? For the Raksasas are proud of their prowess." Hearing his above-quoted speech the sage Viswámitra replied as follows :

(8-15)

पीलस्म्ववंशप्रभवो रावणो नाम राक्षस:।

स ब्रह्माणा दत्तवर्षलेोकंवं बाधते भूगम्। 16 ।महावालें महावीवाँं राक्षसैवंडूभिवर्षत:।

श्रयते च महाराज रावणो राक्षसाधिप:। 17 ।म साक्षाद् वैश्वरणभाता पुरो विश्वसो मुने:।

यदा न खलु वत्रस्य विज्ञकर्ता महावल:। 18 ।। तेन संचोदिती तौ तु राक्षसो च महावली।

मारीचश्र सुबाहुश्र चत्रविजर्भ करिच्छत:। 19 ।।

"There is an ogre, Rávana by name, descended in the line of the sage Pulastya (one of the nine mind-born sons of Brahmā, who are the procreators of the entire creation). Having been granted a boon of immunity from death at the hands of all others except a human being by Brahmā and followed by numerous Raksasas, and possessed of extraordinary strength and great prowess, he oppresses all the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region) to the utmost degree. Nay, Rávana, the ruler of Raksasas, O great king, is widely known to be a son of the sage Viśravā (Pulastya's son) and a real half-brother of Kubera, the eldest son of Viśravā. When the mighty ogre does not personally interfere with a particular sacrifice, considering it below his dignity to interrupt a small undertaking, those two mighty ogres, Mārica and Subāhu, actually cause obstruction in that sacrifice even as directed by him." (16-19)

इत्युक्तो मुनिना तेन रजोवाच मुनिं तदा ।

नहि शक्तोरसम संग्रामे स्थानुं तत्य दुरात्मन: ॥ 20  ॥

Thus addressed by the aforesaid sage, Viśwāmitra, the king then replied to the hermit as follows: “I am not at all able to stand in an encounter with that evil-minded fellow. (20)

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

स त्वं प्रसादं धर्मत्र कुठच्य मम पुत्रके।

मभ चैवाल्यभाग्यस्य दैवर्त हि भवान् गुःः ॥ 21  ॥

“Celebrated as you are, O knower of what is right, show you your favour to my juvenile son as well as to myself, of poor luck as I am in not being able to carry out your behest; for you are a veritable god as well as worthy of adoration to me. (21)

देवदानवग्रभर्वां यक्षाः पतगपत्रगा:।

न शक्ता रावणं सौड़ु किं पुनर्भानवा युधि ॥ 22  ॥

"Not even gods, demons and Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Yakṣas, birds and reptiles are able to withstand Rāvana on the battlefield; how then can men do so? (22)

स तु वीर्यवंतां वीर्यमादते युधि रावण:।

तेन चाहे न शक्तोउमि संयोदूँ तस्य वा बलै: ॥ 23  ॥

सबलो वा मुनिश्रेष्ठ सहितो वा मामात्मजै: ।

कथमयमयगघुं संग्रामाणामकोविदम् ॥ 24  ॥

बालं मे तनयं ब्रह्न् नैव दरास्याम पुत्रकम् ।

अथ क्रतोपमौ युद्धे सुत्तौ सुन्दोमसुन्दयो: ॥ 25  ॥

यज्ञविकर्ग्ती तो ते नैव दास्यामि पुत्रकम् ।

मारीच्छा सुबाहुश वीयवन्ती सुशिक्षिति ॥ 26  ॥

"The said Rāvana, truly speaking, takes away the prowess of the valiant on the battlefield. I am, therefore, not capable of contending with him or with his forces, even though accompanied by my troops or united with my sons, O jewel among sages!

I shall not, therefore, part in any case whatsoever with my juvenile and favourite son, Rāma, who looks like a god and is altogether unacquainted with wars, O holy Brāhmaṇa! If Mārica and Subāhu, the two notorious sons of Sunda and Upasunda respectively—who are full of prowess and highly trained as well and appear as Death on the battlefield—interfere with your sacrificial performance, I shall under no circumstance hand over my pet son Rāma to you. (23-26)

तयोर्यन्तरं योदूं यास्यामि ससुहद्गण: ।

अन्यथा तत्नेन्यामि भवन्ते महबान्यव: ॥ 27  ॥

"I shall personally proceed with hosts of my relations to give battle to either of the two. Otherwise, with my relations I shall crave your indulgence for my inability to comply with your behest." (27)

इति नरपतिजल्पादू द्विजरं कृषिकासून सुमहान् विशेष मनुष: ।

सुहृत इस्य मढ़ोर्जिनाच्यासितः: समभवदुज्ज्वलितो महर्षिवहिः ॥ 28  ॥

A fierce rage possessed the mind of Viśwāmitra (son of Gādhi, a scion of Kuśa), the foremost of Brāhmanas, as a sequel to the above incoherent talk of Daśaratha, a ruler of men. Like a fire well-fed with oblations and sprinkled over with ghee in the course of a sacrifice, the fire of anger thus kindled in the mind of Viśwāmitra, the eminent seer, grew fierce in no time.

(28)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वात्मीकोंये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे विश्रा: सर्ग: ॥ 20  ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty in the Bālakāndā of the glorious Rāmāyanā of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

[Non-Text]



एकविंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXI

The wrath of Viśwāmitra; the intercession of Vasiṣṭha in favour of Viśwāmitra

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य स्नेहपर्यंकुलाक्षरम्।

समप्युः कोशिको वाक्यं प्रत्युवाच महीपतिन्। 1 1  ॥

Hearing the reply, quoted above, of Daśaratha, marked with faltering accents, expressive of parental affection, Viśwāmitra (descended in the line of Kuśa), full of rage, made the following rebuttal to the king: (1) पूर्वमर्थ प्रतिश्रुण प्रतित्रां हतुमिषच्छसि।

राघवाणामयुक्तोउं कुलस्यास्य विषयये: १ २ ॥

“Having first promised to grant the object solicited by me, you want to go back upon your word! This breach of promise is unworthy of the scions of Raghu and will prove to be the ruin of this race. (2)

यदीदं ते क्षம் राजन् गाथिष्यामि यथागतम्।

मिथ्याप्रित्र: काकुत्थ सुखी भव सुहृद्वुतः ॥ 3  ॥

"If this is bearable to you, I shall return even as I came without taking Râma with me. With your promise thus falsified, O scion of Kakutstha, remain at ease in the midst of your relations." (3)

तस्य रोषपरीतस्य विश्वाधिमत्रस्य धीमतः ।

चराल वसुधा कृल्ना देवानां च भयं महत् ॥ 4  ॥

When Viśwāmitra, who was full of wisdom, was seized with fury, the whole earth shook and a grave fear entered the mind of gods. (4)

त्रस्तल्पं तु विज्ञाय जगद् सर्वं महानुभि: ।

नृपति सुझतो धीरो विसघो वाक्यमब्रवीत् ॥ 5  ॥

Perceiving the entire world to be greatly alarmed indeed, the great and wise Rsi Vasistha of noble vows addressed the following words to the king: (5)

इक्ष्वाकृणां कुले जातः साक्षाद्ध भयं इवापर: ।

धूतिमान् सुखतः श्रीमान् न धर्मे हतानूमहिंस ॥ 6  ॥

"Born in the line of the Ikswākus, you are the highest virtue personified, as it were. Full of firmness and observing excellent vows, as you do, Your Majesty ought not to abandon righteousness (in the form of fidelity to your word). (6)

नियु लोकेषु विख्यातो धर्माता इति राधवः ।

स्वधर्म प्रतिपद्धास्व नाधर्म वोदुमहसि ॥ 9  ॥

"A scion of Raghu as you are, celebrated in all the three worlds as one whose mind is given to piety, resort to your innate character, i.e., fidelity to truth. You ought not to embrace unrighteousness in the form of breach of promise. (7)

प्रतिश्रून करिष्येति उक्त वाक्यमकुबर्तेः ।

इच्छापूर्तवेधो भूयात् तस्माद् रामं विसर्जेय ॥ 8  ॥

“Merit that has accrued to you from sacrificial performances (culminating in a horse-sacrifice) and works of public utility (like the construction of wells etc.) will be lost if you fail to redeem the promise made by you, having once solemnly declared that you will do a thing. Therefore, send Rāma with him. (8)

कृतास्वमकृतास्व वा नैनं शुक्ष्यन्ति राक्षसा:।

गूरं कुशिकपूत्रेण ज्वलनेनामृतं यथा १ १ १।

"The ogres will not be able to overpower him, no matter whether he has mastered archery or not, so long as he is protected by Viswámitra (son of Gādhi, a scion of Kuśa) as nectar was guarded by (a belt* of) fire. (9)

* Vide Mahābhārata I, xxxii 22—25.

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

एष विश्रहान् धर्म एष वीर्यैवता वर:।

एष विद्याधिको लोके तपसछ प्रयाणम् ॥ 10  ॥

“Viśwāmitra is piety incarnate; he is the foremost of those endowed with prowess. He is superior in learning to all and is a great repository of asceticism. (10)

एपोउरान् विविधान् वैतिि शैलोकवे सचाराचे ।

नेनम्यः: पुणन् वैति न च वेल्यस्ति केचन ॥ 11  ॥

न देवा नर्षेः कैचिज्ञामरा न च राक्षसा:।

गन्धर्वेधप्रवरा: सर्किनरमहोरगा: ॥ 12  ॥

"He knows the use of the different types of missiles. In all the three worlds including the mobile and immobile creation inhabiting them no other man (than myself) knows him nor shall any other creatures know him, neither gods nor any Rşis nor again the Râksasas nor the foremost of the Gandharvas and Yakşas including the Kinnaras and great Nagas. (11-12)

सर्वास्थीन कुशाश्रय पुत्र: परमधार्मिका:।

कोशिकाय पुरा दत्ता यदा राज्य प्रशासति ॥ 13  ॥

"All the missiles were formerly born as the most pious sons of Krásáwa (a lord of created beings) and were gifted by Lord Šiva to Viśwāmitra while he ruled over a kingdom. (13)

ते.पि पुरा: कृशाश्रय प्रजापतिसुतासुतः।

नैकरूपा महावीयां दीमिन्तो जयावहः ॥ 14  ॥

"The aforesaid son of Krśaśwa, born as they were of the daughters of Dakṣa (another lord of created beings), were possessed of varied forms, endowed with extraordinary prowess and full of splendour, and brought victory to him who employed them in his service. (14)

जया च सूपधा चैव दक्षक्ये सुमध्ये।

ते सूते३लायिन शस्वायिन शनते परमभावस्वरम् ॥ 15  ॥

"Jaya and Suprabhā, the two aforesaid daughters of Dakṣa, who were both possessed of well-proportioned limbs, gave birth to a hundred most effulgent missiles as well as other weapons. (15)

पछाश्रतं सुतोंल्लेपे जया लव्धवार वरान्।

वधायासुरसैन्यानामप्रमेयानरूपिण: ॥ 16  ॥

"Of these, Jayā, who had secured a boon (to this effect), got fifty excellent sons, possessed of infinite glory and devoid of form, for the destruction of Asuric (diabolic) forces. (16)

सूपभाजनयच्यापुवान् पञ्ठाशतं पुन:। संहारान् नाम दुर्धर्षान् दुराकामान् बलीयासे:॥ 17 ॥

“Suprabhā too brought forth fifty more sons, who were exceptionally powerful, hard to overpower, nay difficult even to assail, and collectively known by the name of Sarñhāras (destructive forces). (17)

तानि चाख्याणि वेन्येय यथावत् कुशिकात्मजः ।

अपूर्वाणां च जनने शक्तो भूयघु धर्मवित् ॥ 18  ॥

"The son of Gādhi, present before you, who is conversant with the principles of righteousness, not only knows the use of all those missiles as one ought to but is also capable of evolving new ones. (18)

तेनास्य मुनिमुख्यस्य धर्मज्ञस्य महात्मनः ।

न किंचिद्रस्यविदितं भूतं भयं च रायव ॥ 19  ॥

"Hence nothing relating to the past and the future is unknown, O scion of Raghu, to this high-souled jewel among the sages, who knows everything concerning Dharma, i.e., virtue. (19)

एर्वंवीयों महातेजा विश्वामित्रो महायशगः ।

न रामामने राजन् संशयं नतुमहसि ॥ 20  ॥

"Of such extraordinary might is the highly renowned and exceptionally glorious Viśwāmitra. You ought not, therefore, to entertain any doubt about sending Śri Rāma with him, O king! (20)

तेषां नियणेण शक्तः स्वयं च कुशिकात्मकरः ।

तव पूरन्हिताधाय त्वायुपेताविभयाचते ॥ 21  ॥

“Though capable of punishing the Rākṣasas himself, it is for the sake of doing good to your son, Śri Rāma, that the sage Viśwāmitra (son of Gādhi) has sought you and has solicited him.” (21)



इति मुनिवचनात् प्रसब्रिचिता सयुवर्षभश्रु मुमोद पार्थिवायूय: 1

गमनमधिलकोरो चाश्वस्य प्रशितल्या: कृशिकात्मजाय बुद्यथा || २२ ||

Delighted in mind by the aforesaid explanation by sage Vasisṭha, King Daśaratha, a jewel among the Raghus, the

इत्यार्थी श्रीमदागयणे वाल्मीकांगे आदिकाव्ये बालकाराएं एकविशः सर्ग: ॥ 21  ॥

foremost of kings, whose fame was spread far and wide, felt rejoiced and mentally acquiesced in the act of sending Śri Rāma (a scion of Raghu) in order to gladden Viśwāmitra (son of Gādhi, a scion of Kuśa). (22)

Thus ends Canto Twenty-one in the Bálakāndā of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

द्राविंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXII

King Dásaratha sends Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa with Viśwāmitra and the two princes receive initiation from the latter in the two mystic spells, Balā and Atibalā

तथा वसिष्ठे बुवति राजा दूराश्थः स्ववम्।

प्रह्टवदनों राममाजूल्रा सलक्ष्मणम् ॥ 1  ॥

While Vasisṭha was speaking as aforesaid, King Dáśaratha with an exceptionally cheerful countenance personally called Śrī Rāma alongwith Lakṣmana (knowing as he did that the two were inseparable). (1)

कृतत्वस्वयं मात्रा पित्रा दुराशयेन च।

पुरोक्ष्मा वसिष्ठने मूर्नैरभामिन्नम् ॥ 2  ॥

स पूरं मूर्द्युपाधाय राजा दुराश्यस्तदा ।

ददौ कुशिकपुत्राय सुप्रीतेनान्तरात्मना ॥ 3  ॥

Smelling the head of his son as a token of affection, after he had been blessed by his mother, Queen Kausalyā, as well as by his father, King Daśaratha, and consecrated by Vasiṣṭha, the family priest, by means of benedictory Vedic texts, King Daśaratha then committed him to the care of Viśwāmitra (son of Gādhi) with an extremely delightful mind. (2-3)

ततो वायु: सुख्यसर्शी नीराजस्को वयौ तदा।

विश्वभिर्जत रामं द्वृषा राजीवलोचनम् ॥ 4  ॥

Seeing the lotus-eyed Rāma following

Viśwāmitra at that moment, a breeze delightful to the touch and free from dust began to blow at once. (4)

पुष्यवृष्टिमह्नत्यासीदं देवदुर्भिभिन:स्वनेः।

शड़ुदुर्भिभिरोर्भिभ: प्रयाते तु महात्मिनि ॥ 5  ॥

Even as the high-souled Rāma was about to depart, there was a shower of flowers from the heavens and a loud blast of conches and beating of kettledrums in the capital, accompanied by the beat of celestial drums. (5)

विश्वामित्र ययावयुे ततो रामो महायशना:।

कारकपक्षधरो धवनी तं च सौमिविरल्यगत्। 6 1  ॥

Viswámitra walked in the van and the highly renowned Rāma, adorned with side-locks and armed with a bow, followed next; while Lakṣmana (son of Sumitra) followed the latter. (6)

कलापिनो धनुष्याणी शोभयानी दिशो देश ।

विश्वामित्र महात्मानं शिश्रीषिवि पत्रजारी ॥ 7  ॥

अनुजगमतृस्थूद्री विमतामहमिवाशिंगा ।

अनुयातो श्रिया दीमी शोभयन्तावनिर्विद्ति ॥ 8  ॥

Equipped each with a pair of quivers, bow in hand, and illuminating the ten

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

directions, viz., the four quarters, the four corners intervening the quarters, the upper and the lower directions, the two high-souled princes, who were devoted to the sage and were resplendent with glory and were irreproachable in everyday, and looked like a pair of three-headed serpents (the two quivers appearing like two additional heads), followed the noble-minded Viśwāmitra even as the twin-gods Aświnikumāras, the physicians of gods, would accompany Brahmā (the progenitor of the entire creation)—adding lustre to the sage. (7-8)

तदा कुशिकपूरं तु धनुष्याणी स्वलंकृती।

बब्दगोधाङ्गुलिजाणी खड्गवलती महातृती ॥ 9  ॥

कुभारी चारुवपुषी भातरी रामलक्ष्मणी।

अनुयाती श्रिया दीसी गोभयेतामनिन्दिति ॥ 10  ॥

स्थाणु देवमिवाचिन्यं कुमाराविव पावकांनी।

अध्यधीयोजनं गला सरम्बा दक्षिणो तटे ॥ 11  ॥

रामेति मधुरां वाणीं विश्वामित्रो३प्रथापत।

गृहाण वस्स सलिलं मा भृत कालस्य पर्यये: ॥ 12  ॥

Following at his heels the two juvenile and irreproachable brothers, Rāma and Lakṣmana—who carried a bow in their hand, were duly adorned with jewels, nay, who had gloves of iguana skin fastened about their fingers and were further armed with a sword, who were possessed of great splendour and charming limbs and were radiant with glory—added to the lustre of Viśwāmitra (a scion of Kuśika) as the two boys Skanda and Viśākha (born of the fire-god) would adorn the immortal Lord Śiva, who is beyond all conception. Having walked to a distance of about twelve miles along the southern bank of Sarayū, the sage Viśwāmitra addressed the following sweet words: “Rāma, sip a little water; let there be no loss of time. (9-12)

मन्त्रयामं गृहाण तवं बलामतिबालां तथा।

न श्रभो न चजरो वा ते न रूपस्य विपर्यये: ॥ 13  ॥

"Receive you from me with Lakṣmaṇa

instruction in the chain of Mantras known by the name of Balā and the other known as Atibalā. By recourse to them you will have no fatigue, nor fever, nor will your loveliness be ever marred by old age etc. (13)

न च सुर्म प्रमतं वा धर्मीव्यन्ति नैन्हताः।

न बाहोः सदुगो वीर्ये पृथित्यामरित कक्षन ॥ 14  ॥

"Nor will the ogres (born of Nirrti, the goddess of death and variously regarded as the wife of Adharma or as a daughter of Adharma and Hirnśa) overpower you even when you are asleep or careless (having omitted, for instance, to rinse your mouth, say, after evacuating your bladder); none on earth will equal you in the prowess of arms. (14)

त्रिषु लोकेषु वा राम न भवेत् सदुर्गसन्ति ।

बलामतिबलां चैव पठतसात त्राय ११५ ॥

“Nay, so long as you continue to mutter the spells known by the names of Balā and Atibalā, none will prove to be a match for you in all the three worlds, O Rāma! (15) न सौभाग्ये न दास्विणये न ज्ञाने बुद्धिद्रिश्रये ।

नोतेरे प्रतिवकच्ये समो लोके तलायप ॥ 16  ॥

"None in the world will be your equal, O sinless one, either in good fortune or in prowess or in wisdom or in the judgment of your intellect or, again, in counter-arguments. (16)

एतद्विवधादुये लब्ये न भवेत् सदुर्गसत्त्व।

बला चातविला चैव सर्वज्ञानस्य मातरो ॥ 17  ॥

"When the two aforementioned spells have been received (learnt) by you, none will compare with you in any virtue whatsoever; for Balā and Atibalā are the sources of all wisdom (inasmuch as they dispel hunger and thirst etc., which dull one's intellect and thereby make one forget whatever he has learnt). (17)

श्रुतियपासे न ते राम भविष्येते नरोतम।

बलमात्रिबलां चैव पठतस्तात राघव ॥ 18  ॥

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

“So long as you continue to repeat Balā as well as Atibalā, hunger and thirst, O Rāma, will never be felt by you, O jewel among men! (18)

गृहाण सर्वलोकस्य गुपसे रघुनन्दन।

विद्याद्वयमधीयाने यशश्राथ भवेद् भुलि।

पितामसुते छोते विदो तेजसम्पित्ति ॥ 19  ॥

“So long as you go on muttering the two spells your renown will spread over the entire globe; for these two spells are the daughters of Brahma (the creator) and are full of efficacy. (19)

प्रदातु तव काकुत्थ सदुर्गस्वं हि पार्थिति।

कामं बहुगुणा: सर्वे लव्येते नात्र संशय: ॥ 20  ॥

तपसा सभ्युते चैते बहुत्पे पथिव्यतः ।

ततो रामो जलं स्यूषा प्रब्रटवद्न: शुर्चि: ॥ 21  ॥

प्रतिजग्राह ते विदो महर्षेभिवातनतः ।

विद्यासमुदितो रामः शुर्गुधे भीमविक्रम: ॥ 22  ॥

सहसराश्मभगवान् शरदीव दिवाकतः ।

गुरुकाव्याणि सर्वाणि नियुच्य कुशिकाकासजे ।

ऊषुस्तां रजनीं तत्र सरम्यां समुखं जय: ॥ 23  ॥

"I feel inclined to impart the knowledge of these spells to you, O scion of Kakuttsha; for you are fit to receive them, O prince!

Even though all the manifold virtues referred to (in verses 13 to 19) above already exist in you—there is no doubt about it, the two spells mentioned above will grow many times more efficacious when duly grasped by you, who are asceticism personified, being the goal of all austerities." Sipping water, Śrī Rāma, who is all-pure by nature, received with a most cheerful countenance initiation in the aforesaid two spells from that great sage, Viśwāmitra, of purified mind. Equipped with the knowledge of the aforesaid spells, Śrī Rāma of supreme prowess shone like the glorious sun, casting innumerable rays, in autumn. Śrī Rāma and Lakṣmana performed all the duties that one owes to a teacher and all the three spent the night with ease on the bank of the Sarayī there. (20-23)

दशरथनुसूनुस्तमाथ्यां नृणशयनेनुक्तित तद्योतिषाथू। कुशिकासुतवजोज्ञान्तिताथ्यां सुविधास सा विषधी विषधारी च। 124 ।।

To Śri Rāma and Lakṣmana, the two jewels among the sons of King Dāsaratha, who, even though they lay there on a bed of straw, unworthy of princes, were bestowed with love all along by Viśwāmitra (son of Gādhi), that night appeared delightful indeed. (24)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्वाविंश: सर्ग: ॥ 22  ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-two in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

त्रयोविंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXIII

Night-long sojourn of Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa with Viśwāmitra in a holy hermitage at the confluence of the Gaṅgā and the Sarayū

प्रभातायां तु शर्बर्वा विश्वामित्रो महामुपिन: । अभ्यभाषत काकुत्स्थी शयानो पर्यसंस्तरे ॥ 1  ॥

The night having all but culminated in dawn, the great sage Viśwāmitra spoke as follows to Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa (the two

scions of Kakuttsha), lying on a bed of dry leaves mixed with straw: (1)

कौसल्या सूपज्ञा राम पूर्वां संध्या प्रवर्तते ।

उत्तिष्ठ नरशार्दूल कतन्वयं दैवमाहिकम् ॥ 2  ॥

"Kausalyā is blessed with a worthy son

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

in you, O Rāma! The morning twilight has set in. Therefore, get up, O tiger among men! Contemplation on the Deity and the daily routine of duties making for the purification of the body have to be gone through." (2)

तस्यै: परमोदारं वचः श्रुत्वा नरोतमो।

स्नाला कृतोदकी वीरी जेपतु: परमं जपम् ॥ 3  ॥

Hearing the exceedingly gentle admonition of the celebrated sage, Viśwāmitra, the two heroes, Śrī Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, the foremost among men, performed their ablutions and, having offered oblations of water to the sun-god, muttered the most sacred text, the Gāyatrī*, other than which there is no holier text. (3)

कृतालिहके महावीर्वीं विश्वामित्रं तपोधनम्।

अभिवश्यातिसंह्यो गमनायाधितस्थतु: ॥ 4  ॥

Having concluded their morning devotions (viz., the Sandhyā prayers, Brahma-Yajñā or recitation of portions of the Vedas and other sacred texts as an offering to Rṣis, forming part of the five major Yajñas, fetching pieces of wood for being offered to the sacred fire, and so on) and saluting Viśwāmitra, rich in asceticism, the two exceptionally valiant princes, Śri Rāma and Laksmana, fell extremely delighted and stood before the latter, ready to proceed further. (4)

तौ प्रयातौ महावीशी दिव्यां जिपक्षाणां नदीम्।

ददुशाते ततस्तत्र सरखा: संगमे शुषे ॥ 5  ॥

While moving onward from that spot where they had broken their journey overnight, the two very mighty princes sighted the divine river Gaṅgā, which (flows through heaven, earth and the subterranean regions and thus) takes a threefold course near its well-known and blessed confluence with the Sarayū. (5)

तत्राप्रभपदं पुण्यमृषीणां भावितात्यनाम्।

बहुवर्षेसूक्षाप्रिण तप्यतां परमं तप: ॥ 6  ॥

There they further beheld the holy site of the hermitages of Rṣis of purified mind, that had been practising the highest form of asceticism for the past many thousand years. (6)

तं दुह्वा परमप्रीती राज्यौ पुण्यमाओमम्।

ऊचतुस्तं महात्मानं विश्वामित्रमिदं वच: ॥ 9  ॥

Supremely delighted to behold that sacred abode of hermits, Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, the two scions of Raghu, addressed the following prayer to the celebrated Viśwāmitra of noble mind: (7)

कस्यामाघ्रभ: पुण्य: को वसिम्न वसते पुमान्।

भगवञ्छीतुमिच्छाव: परं कोतृहलं हि तो ॥ 8  ॥

"Whose holy hermitage is this? What personage, we ask you, dwells in it? We both desire to hear this; for great is our curiosity in this behalf, O venerable Sir!" (8) तयोस्तद् वचनं श्रुला प्रहस्य मुनिनुगवः ।

अज्वीच्छ्यन्तां राम यस्यायं पूर्वं आश्रभः ॥ 9  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of the two brothers, Viśvāmitra, the foremost of hermits, heartily laughed and said, “Hear, O Rāma, of him whose former residence this is. (9)

कंदरपीं मृतिंमानासीत् काम इत्सुच्यते बुधै:।

तपस्पतनिष्ठ स्थाणुं नियमेन समाहितम् ॥ 10  ॥

कृतोद्राई तु देवेशं गछ्छन्तं समरूद्गणम्।

धर्षयामास दुमैधा हुकृतश्च महात्मना ॥ 11  ॥

"Kandarpa (the god of love), who is also spoken of by the wise as Kāma (Cupid), was endowed with a living form in the past. On one occasion the foolish fellow was bold enough to assail with shafts of love Lord Śiva, the suzerain Lord of gods—who had been performing austerities in this very hermitage and remained uninterruptedly absorbed in deep meditation—while He was after having married going out along with the entire host of the forty-nine wind-gods in order

* The scripture tells us: : न गायव्या: परं जयम्,

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

to meet Goddess Parvati, and Love was thereupon snubbed with a roar in the form of the sound 'hum' by the high-souled Lord. (10-11)

অফল্যাপ্তি কুচ্টে অন্ধ্রু্যা রশুনন্তন। জুপার্বন্টন গারীরান্তু স্বল্যারাগ্যি ডুমন্ট: ॥ 12  ॥

"He was further reproached by Lord Rudra (the god of destruction) with His third eye, O scion of Raghu, and lo! all the limbs of the evil-minded fellow dropped off from his body. (12)

তন্ন গার்ந্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত্ত్త্ত্ত্ত్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్తత్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్తిత్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్త్

to meet Goddess Parvati, and Love was thereupon snubbed with a roar in the form of the sound 'hum' by the high-souled Lord. (10-11)

अवध्यातछ रूतेण चक्षुषा रघुनन्दन।

व्यूशीर्यन्त शरीरात् स्वात् सर्वग्रायाणि दुभतेः ॥ 12  ॥

"He was further reproached by Lord Rudra (the god of destruction) with His third eye, O scion of Raghu, and lo! all the limbs of the evil-minded fellow dropped off from his body. (12)

तत्र गारं इतं तस्य निर्देश्यस्य महात्मन:।

अशरीर: कृतः कामः कोधाद् देवेक्षेण है ॥ 13  ॥

"It was on that occasion that the limbs of the haughty fellow, consumed through the wrath of Lord Śiva, the suzerain Lord of gods, disappeared and it was in this way that Kāma was rendered bodiless. (13)

अनढ़े इति विज्ञातस्तदापभृति राषव ।

स चाजूबिधियः श्रीमान् यत्राङ़् से मुमोच् हा ॥ 14  ॥

"Thenceforward he came to be widely known by the name of Ananga (bodiless), O scion of Raghu, and the tract of land where that glorious being shed his embodied state became known as the Anga territory: so the tradition goes. (14)

तत्यायमाभ्य: पुण्यस्तस्ये मुनव: पुगा।

शिष्या धर्मपरा वीर तेचां पायं न विद्योत ॥ 15  ॥

"This holy hermitage belongs to Him and these sages (practising austerities here at present) have been His disciples in the past. As such they are devoted to piety and no sin exists in them, O Rāma! (15)

इहाए त्रनीं राम वसेम शुभदर्शन।

पुणययो: सरितोर्मध्ये श्रस्तरिष्यामहे वयम् ॥ 16  ॥

"Let us halt for this night in this hermitage, hemmed in by the two holy streams, O Rāma of handsome looks; tomorrow we shall cross the Gargā. (16)

अभिभाछामहे सर्वे शृचय: पुणयमाङ्रमम्।

इह वास: परोउमाका सुखं वत्थमाहे निशाम।। 17 ।।।

स्वाताश्र कृतजयाश्र हुतहया नरोतम।

तेषां संवदतां तत्र तपोदौर्धेण चक्षूया।। 18 ।।।

विज्ञाय परमप्रीता मुनयो हर्षमागमम्।

अर्थ्यं पाछां तथासं-उतिथ्यं निवेश कुशिकातमजे।। 19 ।।

गामलक्ष्मणयो: पश्रादकुर्बव्रतिथिक्रियाम्।

सत्कारं समनुप्राय कशाधिपरभिरज्ञम्।। 20 ।।

"Let us all enter the holy hermitage when we are purified by bath etc. Our sojourn here will be most welcome and we shall happily spend the night here after we have bathed, muttered our prayers and poured oblations into the sacred fire; O jewel among men!" While they were talking together (as aforesaid) there (outside the hermitage), the sages dwelling in the hermitage, felt supremely delighted to discover their presence with their eyes that had attained a long range (clairvoyance) through askesis, and experienced a thrill of joy. Having offered to Viswamitra water to wash his hands and feet with and extending their hospitality to him, they subsequently offered hospitality to Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, too. Having received attentions in return from Viswāmitra as well as from Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, they regaled them with anecdotes, etc. (17-20)

यथाहैमवप्न् संध्यामृषवस्ते समाहिता:।

तत्र वासिशिर्भातीना मुनिधिः: सुखतेः सह ॥ 21  ॥

न्यवसन् सुसुखं तत्र कामाश्रमपदे तथा।

क्रथाशिर्भिरामाधिरभिरभागे नृपात्मजों।

नर्यमास धर्मत्मा कोशिको मुनिनुंपाव: ॥ 22  ॥

At dusk when day and night meet, the aforesaid Rāsīs (including Viśwāmitra and his pupils, Śrī Rāma and Laksmana) muttered the Gāyatri-Mantra according to their ability* with a calm and collected mind. Taken by the sages of holy vows dwelling in that

* The maximum Japa that one is expected to do after his Sandhyā prayers is one thousand repetitions, the moderate number is one hundred, while ten is the irreducible minimum—सहसपमां द्वैशे शनतमध्यं द्वागवातम्।



hermitage with them, Viśwāmitra and his two pupils stayed most comfortably on that site of the hermitage, associated with the name of Kāma; while Viśwāmitra (a scion

of Kuśa), the foremost of ascetics, whose mind is given to piety, entertained the two charming princes with delightful stories. (21-22)

इल्यार्चे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकांगे आदिकाव्ये बालकाराएं जयोविंश: सर्प: ॥ 23  ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-three in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

चतुर्विंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXIV

An account of the Sarayū given by Viśwāmitra; some facts relating to the ogress Tāṭakā revealed and hints given about killing her

ततः प्रभाते विमले कृतात्रिक्रमरिदमो।

विश्वामित्रं पुरस्कृत्य नद्यास्तीरमुपागतो ॥ 1  ॥

Placing in the forefront Viśwāmitra, who had just finished his daily routine of morning devotions, the two brothers, who were capable of subduing their enemies, arrived at the bank of the river Ganga. (1)

ते च सर्वे महात्मानो मुनयः संशितज्ञतः। उपस्थाय शुभां नावं विश्वामिभ्यमथाबुवन्॥ 2  ॥

Getting an excellent boat to ferry them across, all the high-souled sages of austere vows, mentioned above, forthwith spoke to Viśwāmitra as follows: (2)

आरोहतु भवान् नावं राजपुत्रपुरकृत:।

आरिष्टे गच्छ पथानं मा भृत् कालस्य पर्यय: ॥ 3  ॥

“Board you the boat followed by the king’s sons and, having crossed the river, proceed on your journey at an auspicious moment. Let there be no loss of time.” (3)

विश्वामित्रस्थित्यकूला तानुभीन् प्रतिपृथ्य च।

ततार सहितताथ्यां सरिते सागरंगेमामू।। 4  ॥

Saying “Amen!” and returning the salutations of those seers assembled to see them off with honour, Viśwāmitra, accompanied by the two brothers, began to

cross the river Garghā (hastening to meet the ocean). (4)

तत्र शुधाव वे शब्द तोयसंरम्बर्विधितम्।

मध्यमाग्य तोयस्य तस्य शब्दस्य निश्रयम् ॥ 5  ॥

जातुकामो महातेजा: सह रामः कनीयसा।

अथ रामः सरिमध्ये पप्रच्छ मुनिपुंगवम् ॥ 6  ॥

Reaching the middle of the stream, the highly glorious Rāma alongwith Lakṣmana (the younger of the two) distinctly heard on the river a noise enhanced by the agitation caused by the striking of waves against one another, and felt eager to know the definite cause of the noise. In mid stream Śri Rāma presently questioned in the following words Viśwāmitra, the foremost of hermits : (5-6)

वारिणो भिश्यानस्य किमयं तुमुलेि छिनि: १

राधवस्य वच: श्रुत्वा कीर्तृहतसमपवित्तम् ॥ 9  ॥

कथयामास धर्मात्या तस्य शब्दस्य निश्रयम् ।

कैतालयवर्ते तम मनसा निर्मितं परम् ॥ 8  ॥

ब्रहणा नरशाईल तेनेदं मानसं सर: ।

तत्समात् सुखाव सरसः सायोध्यामुपगृहते ॥ 9  ॥

सर:प्रवृत्ता सरयुः पुण्या ब्रह्मसरश्छृता ।

तत्सयामतुलः शब्दो जाह्वीमिभवर्तते ॥ 10  ॥

वारिसंक्षीभजो राम प्रणामं निवतः कुरः ।

तान्यां तु तावुषी कृता प्रणाममतिधार्मिकी ॥ 11  ॥

* BÁLAKÂNDA*

<table><tr><td>तीरं दक्षिणमासाड्य जमन्तुलंघ्विकमौ।</td></tr><tr><td>स वर्न घोरसंकाशं दूढ़ा नरवात्मज: ॥ 12  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>अविप्रहतमैक्ष्वाक: पपछ्छ मुपिनुपंगवम्।</td></tr><tr><td>अहो वनमिदं दुर्ग ऋलिलकागणसंयुतम् ॥ 13  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>भैरवै: श्रापदै: कौणीं शकुःनैद्रिफणारयैः।</td></tr><tr><td>नानाप्राकरै: शकुःनैवीशयाद्धभैरवस्वः ॥ 14  ॥</td></tr></table>

"What is the cause of this tumultuous noise ostensibly proceeding from a volume of water striking one against another?" Hearing the inquiry of Śri Rāma, marked with curiosity, the sage, whose mind is given to piety, stated as follows the definite cause of that noise: "There exists, O Rāma, on Mount Kailāsa a great lake created by Brahmā (the creator) with his mind, hence it is known by the name of Mānasa (born of the mind), O tiger among men! A river named Sarayū—so-called because it has its source in a lake (ससो बौति or बाति) and hallowed in that it has flowed from a lake created by Brahmā—emanated from that lake. It encircles Ayodhyā on all sides except the south. This sound, which has no parallel, proceeds from the violent commotion caused by the onrush of its waters even as it rushes to meet the Jahnavi, Garīgā, so-called because it was drunk off by the sage Jahnu, whose sacrificial grounds were inundated by it, and was later released by him through his ears. Offer salutation to the two rivers where they meet with a concentrated mind, O Rāma!" Offering salutation to the two streams united with one another and reaching the southern bank of the Garīgā, the two brothers, exceptionally pious as they were, proceeded on their onward journey with quick paces alongwith Viśwāmitra. Beholding a forest of terrible aspect and unfrequented by men, Śri Rāma (the son of a king, the foremost of men), a scion of Ikṣwāku, questioned as follows Viśwāmitra, a jewel among sages: "Oh! this forest is difficult of access! It is swarmed with crickets and infested by fierce

beasts of prey and vultures raising harsh notes and various other kinds of birds uttering fierce cries. (7-14)

सिंह्वायप्रवारोक्ष्व वारणैश्वापि शोभितम्।

थावाश्रकर्णककु भैषिवल्पितनुद्धपातले: ॥ 15  ॥

संकीर्णं बदरीधिश्र किं स्विंद राकर्णं वनम्।

तमुचाच महातेजा विश्वामित्रे महामुपिनः ॥ 16  ॥

"What could possibly be this fearful forest graced with lions, tigers and boars, as well as with elephants, and thickly set with Dhavas, Aswakarnas, Kakubhas (Arjunas), Bilvas, Tindukas, Pātalas and jujubes?" The great sage Viśwāmitra, possessed as he was of exceptional glory, replied to him as follows: (15-16)

श्रूप्तां वत्स काकुत्स्थ यस्यैतद् दारुणं वनम्।

एती जनपदौ स्मतीतो पूर्वमात्रा नरोतमा ॥ 17  ॥

मलदाश्र कत्काष्षा देविनमर्णिनिर्मिती ।

पुरा वृत्रवधे राम मलेन समभिपत्नम् ॥ 18  ॥

क्षुधा चैव सहसाक्षं ब्रहाह्या समाविशत्।

तमिन्रे मलिनं देवा ऋषयश्र तपोधनाः ॥ 19  ॥

कलशे: स्नापयामासुमैलं चास्य प्रमोचयन्।

इह भूभ्यां मलं दत्त्वा देवा: काह्वमेव च ॥ 20  ॥

शरीरजं महेन्द्रस्य ततो हर्ष प्रपेदितः।

निर्मलो निष्करूपश्र सूढ़ इन्नो यथाभवत् ॥ 21  ॥

"Hear, O darling, of the being to whom

this forest belongs, O Râma ! Here on this

land, O jewel among men, there existed in

the former days two prosperous kingdoms,

the Malada and the Karūṣa by name,

brought into existence by the effort of gods.

In the ancient times, when the demon Vītra

was killed in battle by Indra, the sin of killing

a Brāhmaṇa laid hold of Indra (distinguished

by a thousand eyes), who was accordingly

overcome with impurity and hunger. The gods

and the Rṣis rich in askesis bathed the

aforesaid Indra, impure as he was (through

sin, with jars full of water of the holy Ganga,

further consecrated by the utterance of

fierce cries. (7-14)

सिंहस्याप्रवरोक्ष्व वारणैश्वापि शोभितम्।

श्वाश्रकर्णककु भैषिल्वतित्बुकावतले: ॥ 15  ॥

संकीर्णं बदरीधिश्र किं स्विंदं द्राकर्णं वनम्।

तमुचाच महातेजा विश्वामित्रो महामुपिनः ॥ 16  ॥

"What could possibly be this fearful forest graced with lions, tigers and boars, as well as with elephants, and thickly set with Dhavas, Aswakarnas, Kakubhas (Arjunas), Bilvas, Tindukas, Pātalas and jujubes?" The great sage Viśwāmitra, possessed as he was of exceptional glory, replied to him as follows: (15-16)

श्रूयता वस्त्र काकुत्स्थ यस्यैतद् दारुणं वनम् ।

एती जनपदौ स्मतीतो पूर्वमात्रां नोरात्मा ॥ 17  ॥

मलदाश्र कल्भाश्र देविनमाणिनिर्मिती ।

पुरा वृत्रवधे राम मलेन समभितुम् ॥ 18  ॥

क्षुधा चैव सहसाक्षं ब्रहाह्या समाविशत् ।

तमिनर मलिनं देवा ऋषयश्र तपोधनाः ॥ 19  ॥

कलशे: स्नापयामासुमैलं चायस प्रमोचयन् ।

इह भू-म्यां मलं दत्ता देवा: कात्वमेव च ॥ 20  ॥

शरीरजं महेन्द्रस्य ततो हर्ष प्रपेदिते ।

निर्मलो निष्करूपश्र शुद्ध इन्नो यथाभवत् ॥ 21  ॥

"Hear, O darling, of the being to whom this forest belongs, O Râma ! Here on this land, O jewel among men, there existed in the former days two prosperous kingdoms, the Malada and the Karūṣa by name, brought into existence by the effort of gods. In the ancient times, when the demon Vṛta was killed in battle by Indra, the sin of killing

a Brâhmana laid hold of Indra (distinguished by a thousand eyes), who was accordingly overcome with impurity and hunger. The gods and the Rşis rich in askesis bathed the aforesaid Indra, impure as he was (through sin, with jars full of water of the holy Gaṅgā, further consecrated by the utterance of sacred texts and washed off his impurity thereby. Depositing the impurity as well as



the pangs of hunger fallen off from the body of the great Indra in this tract of land, the gods derived joy thereby. And Indra, for his part, was completely rid of his impurity and hunger. (17-21)

ततो देशस्य सूप्रितो वरं प्रादादनुत्तमम्।

इमौ जनपदौ स्मीतौ ख्याति लोके गमिष्यत: ॥ 22  ॥

मलवाद्य करूषधु ममाङ्गमलधारिणी।

साधु साध्यिति ते देवा: पाकशासनमबुवन् ॥ 23  ॥

देशस्य पूजां तां दुहा कृतां शक्रेण धीभात।

एती जनपदौ स्मीतौ दीर्घंकालमरिद्धम ॥ 24  ॥

मलवाद्य करूषधु मुदिता धनधायन्तः ।

कस्यचित्तवध कालस्य यक्षिणी कामरूपिणी ॥ 25  ॥

बलं नागसहस्वस्य धारयन्ती तदा ह्रभूत्।

ताटका नाम भई ते भार्यों सुन्दस्य धीभन्तः ॥ 26  ॥

मारीचो राश्रस: पुत्रो यस्या: शक्रपराकमः ।

वृत्तबाहुर्मंहाशीर्षी विपुलालयस्तनुर्मंहान् ॥ 27  ॥

राश्रसो भेरवाकारो नित्यं जासयते प्रजा: ।

इमौ जनपदी नित्यं विनाशयति राचव ॥ 28  ॥

मललंघ्र शरूकर्ण शताका दुरुचारिणि ।

सेयं पथानमावून्य वसलत्यधीयोजनै ॥ 29  ॥

Highly pleased at this Indra thereupon conferred the following superb boon on the two tracts of land: “These two stretches of land, that have imbibed my impurity, will grow prosperous and will be known in the world by the names of Malada and Karuśa.” Seeing that honour conferred on those tracts of land by the wise Indra, the gods, for their part, applauded the celebrated Indra (the chastiser of the demon Pāka) in the words “Well done! good!” For a considerable length of time, O subbuer of foes, these two territories, Malada and Karuśa, thenceforward continued to be prosperous, and rich in wealth and food-grains. Now, when some time had elapsed since the aforesaid incident, there appeared, in this region, so the tradition goes, a Yakṣa

woman, Tātaka by name, capable of assuming any form at will and possessing at the very time of her birth the might of a thousand elephants, who is the wife of the wise Sunda, may good betide you, and whose son, the ogre Mārica, possesses the strength of Indra and is endowed with round arms, a large head, an enormous mouth and a colossal body. The mighty Rāksaṣa, who has a terrible form, is a perennial source of terror to the people; while Tātaka, who conducts herself like a wicked woman, constantly ravages these two principalities of Malada and Karūṣa, O sicion of Raghu! As such she lives in an area of twelve miles, obstructing the road. (22-29)

अत एव च गतन्यं ताटकाया वनं यतः।

स्वबाहुबलमाश्रित यजीमां दुरुद्धारिणीम् ॥ 30  ॥

"For this very reason let us proceed in the quarter where exists the forest of Tātaka. Relying on the might of your own arms, make short work of this ogress of wicked conduct. (30)

महायोगादिमं देरां कुक निष्कण्टकं पुनः । नहि काश्रिदमं देरां शगतो हागन्तुमीद्रगम् ॥ 31  ॥

यक्षिपया घोरया राम उसादितमसहाय। पत्न्ते ते सर्वमाख्यातं यथैतद् दारुणं वनम् ।

यक्ष्या चोसात्रितं सर्वमह्यापि न निवर्तते ॥ 32  ॥

“Under my order make this realm thornless as before. None is, really speaking, able to visit this land, though so holy and beautiful, tormented as it is by the terrible Yakṣa woman, who has grown so intolerable. In this way has been told by me everything that you asked, viz., how this forest looks so fearful, how the entire region has been laid waste by the Yakṣa woman and how she does not desist from her nefarious activities even to this day.” (31-32)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे चतुर्गिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 24  ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-four in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

पश्रविंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXV

Questioned by Śri Rāma, Viśwāmitra tells him more about the birth of Tāṭakā, of her marriage with Sunda, as well as about the birth of Mārica as a result of their union, and how the latter was subjected to an execration by sage

Agastya, and finally urges Śri Rāma to despatch the ogress

अथ तस्याप्रमेयस्य मुनेर्वेचनमुत्तमम्।

श्रृता पुरुषशादूल: प्रत्युवाच शुभां गिरम् ॥ 1  ॥

Hearing the noble utterance of the celebrated Viśwamitra, possessed of immeasurable glory, Śri Rāma, a tiger among men, forthwith asked the following sweetly-worded question: (1)

अत्यवीयां यदा यक्षी श्रृयते मुनिपुंगाव ।

कर्थ नागसहस्य धारयत्यबला बलम् ॥ 2  ॥

"When Tātaka, the Yakṣa woman, is known, from what you say, to be a female (proverbially lacking in strength), O jewel among hermits, she must presumably be of poor might. How then does she wield the strength of a thousand elephants?" (2)

इल्युक्ते वचनं श्रुता राघवस्यामितीजसः ।

हर्षयेउलक्ष्याया वाचा सलक्ष्मणमिर्दमम् ॥ 3  ॥

विश्वामित्रोज्ववीद् वाक्यं शृणु येन बलोकटका ।

बरदानकृतं वीर्थे धाराययबला बलम् ॥ 4  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid question of Śri Rāma, a scion of Raghu, possessed of infinite strength, Viśwāmitra addressed the following reply to the former, who was capable of chastising the enemy, gladdening him along with Laksmana by his bland speech: "Hear the reason why she is richly endowed with strength. Though a frail woman by birth, she wields extraordinary strength conferred by a boon granted in her favour.

(3-4)

पूर्वमासीमहायक्षः सुकेतुर्नाम वीर्थवान्।

अनपत्थ: शुभाचारः स च तेपे महतप: ॥ 5  ॥

पितामहस्तु सुप्रीतस्तस्य यक्षपतेस्तदा।

कन्यारन्तं ददी राम ताटकां नाम नामत: ॥ 6  ॥

“Formerly there was a great and powerful Yaksā, Suketu by name, who was issueless, though of virtuous conduct. He, therefore, practised great austerities with intent to please Brahmā. Highly gratified even in the course of his austerities, Brahmā (the progenitor of the entire creation, which sprang from his mind-born sons) gave him an excellent daughter, Tāṭakā by name: so the tradition goes. (5-6)

ददौ नागसहस्य बलं चास्य: पितामहः।

न तेव पुरं यक्षाय ददो चासौ महायशा: ॥ 7  ॥

“Brahmā further vouchsafed to her the strength of a thousand elephants. The illustrious Brahmā, however, did not deliberately grant a son to the Yakṣa (obviously thinking that a son of the kind desired by him would prove a great scourge to the world). (7)

तां तु बालां विवर्धनीं रूपयोवनशालिनीम्।

जम्पपुराय सुत्वाय ददौ भार्यं यशस्विनीम् ॥ 8  ॥

"Suketu for his part gave away as wife that glorious girl, rich in comeliness of form and exuberance of youth, even while she was growing apace to womanhood, to Sunda, son of Jambha, who, being a demon, was qualified to marry a Yakṣa girl, both being demigods. (8)

कस्यचित् तव श कालस्य यक्षी पुत्रं व्याजायत।

मारीचं नाम दुर्भयं वः शगपाद् राक्षसोभवत्। 1  ॥

"Now after some time Tāṭakā, the Yakṣa girl, actually gave birth to a son, Mārica by name, who was hard to overcome and who turned to be an ogre (living on raw flesh) under a curse. (9)



सुदे तु निहते राम अगस्वमूमिसतमम्।

ताटका सह पुत्रेण प्रधर्षयितुभिच्छति ॥ 10  ॥

“Sunda having been killed by the sage Agastya by means of a curse, O Rāma, Tāṭakā alongwith her son sought to kill Agastya, the foremost of Rīsīs. (10)

भक्षार्थ जाततसंरभा गर्जनी साध्यधावत।

आपतन्नी तु तां दृष्टा अगस्त्यो भगवानुपि: ॥ 11  ॥

राक्षसर्वं भजस्वेति मारीचं व्याजहार स: ।

अगस्त्यः परमामर्षेस्ताटकामपि शासवान् ॥ 12  ॥

"Her rage having been excited, she (as well as Márica) ran towards the sage in order to devour him. Seeing her rushing towards him, Agastya, the mighty Rsi, however, said to Márica, "Attain the state of an ogre!" Full of extreme anger the aforesaid Agastya cursed Tātaka too in the following words: (11-12)

पुरुषाठी महायक्षी विकृता विकृतानना।

इदं रूपं विकृयाशु दारूणं रूपमस्तु ते ॥ 13  ॥

“Dropping this comely form at once, get transformed into an ugly man-eating ogress with a mis-shapen countenance, a great Yakṣa woman as you are! Let your personality assume a cruel aspect.” (13)

सैषा शापकृतामधौ ताटका क्रोधमूँच्छता।

देशगुस्मात्यवलेनागसल्यावार्तिं शुभम। 14 ॥

"Her indignation having been aroused by the execration, the aforesaid Tātaka, thus transformed and bewildered with anger, ravages this holy tract, once trodden by Agastya. (14)

एनां राघव दुर्वैतां यक्षीं परमदारुभागम्।

गोब्राह्यणहिताधीय जिह दृष्टपराकमम् ॥ 15  ॥

"For the good of the cows and the Brāhmanas, O Rāma, get rid of this most cruel Yakṣa woman of evil conduct and perverted valour. (15)

नहोनां शापसंसृष्टा काश्रदुस्तहते पुभान्।

निहन्तु त्रिषु लोकेषु त्वामुते रघुनन्दन। 16  ॥

“No man in all the three worlds other than you dare kill this woman, made formidable by a curse, O scion of Raghu ! (16)

नहि ते स्त्रीवधकुते घृणा कार्यां नरोत्तम।

चातुर्वेग्यंहितार्थं हि कतैंच्यं राजस्मुत्तना ॥ 17  ॥

नृशंसमनुशंसं वा प्रजारक्षणकारणात् ।

पातकं वा सदोषं वा कतैंच्यं रक्षता सदा ॥ 18  ॥

“No disgust should be felt by you for the act of killing a woman, O jewel among men! For in the interest of the four grades of society, even a cruel deed has in any case to be perpetrated by a Ksatriya prince as well as an act which is anything but cruel. For the protection of the people even that which is sinful or wrong must invariably be done by one whose duty it is to protect. (17-18)

राज्यभारिनियुक्तानामे धर्म: सनातन:।

अध्यार्जी ताकुकत्थ धर्मों हाथर्यां न विद्यते ॥ 91  ॥

"Such is the eternal duty of those charged with the onus of administration. Make short work of the impious woman, O scion of Kakutstha; for there exists no righteousness in her. (19)

श्रयते हि पुरा शक्रो विरोचनसुतां नृप। पृथिवीं हन्तुमिछन्तीं मन्थरामभ्यसुद्यत्। 20  ॥

"It is heard that in the former days Indra killed Mantharā, daughter of Virocana (son of Prahlāda), who desired to destroy the earth, O protector of men! (20)

विष्णुना च पुरा राम भपुतपनी पतित्वता।

अतिनरं लोकमिच्छन्ती काव्यमाता निषपूदिता ॥ 21  ॥

“Again, the wife of the sage Bhrgu and the mother of Sukrācārya (the well-known preceptor of the demons), who, though devoted to her husband, desired to see the world bereft of Indra, was disposed of by Lord Viṣṇu* in the past, O Rama! (21)

* We read in the Matsya-Purāna (Discourse XLVII) how during the absence of her son, Śukra, who

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

<table><tr><td>एनैश्र्राज्यैश्र्र</td><td>बहुभी</td><td>राजपुत्रैमहात्मभि: 1</td></tr><tr><td>अधर्मसहिता</td><td>नायों</td><td>हता: पुरुषसत्तमै: 1</td></tr><tr><td>तस्मादेनां</td><td>घुर्णा</td><td>वल्कला जहि मच्छासनानुपि ॥ 22  ॥</td></tr></table>

"Women characterized by impiety were

killed by all these as well as by many other high-souled Kṣatriya princes, who were the foremost of men. Therefore, shaking off all tenderness, despatch her by my command, O protector of men !” (22)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंने आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे पश्रविंश: सर्पि: ॥ 25  ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-five in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Ṣsi and the oldest epic.

घड्विंशः सर्गः

Canto XXVI

Śrī Rāma kills Tāṭakā

मुनेर्वनमक्लीबं श्रुत्वा नरवारामज: ।

राघवः प्राझलिन्धूत्वा प्रत्युवाच दूदबत: ॥ 1  ॥

Hearing the utterance of the sage Viśwāmitra, which was anything but cowardly, Prince Rāma, a scion of Raghu, firm of resolve as he was, replied as follows with folded hands : (1)

पितृत्वीचनिर्देशात् पितृत्वीचनगीरावात्।

वचनं कौसिकस्थेति कर्तेल्यमविशज्ञा ॥ 2  ॥

अनुशिष्टो उपस्योध्यायां गुरुभये महात्मना ।

पिजा दूरश्येनाहं नावजेयं हि तद्धवः ॥ 3  ॥

"In the midst of other elders at Ayodhyā I was instructed by my high-souled father, King Dáśaratha, in the following words: 'In pursuance of the instructions of your father conveyed in his actual words and out of respect for your father's word the command of Viśwāmitra (a scion of Kuśa) must be carried out by you without any scruple!' His admonition, therefore, should on no account be ignored by me. (2-3)

सोड़े पितृत्वंः श्रुता शासनाद् बढ़ावादिनः ।

करिष्यामि न संदेहस्ताटकावधमुत्तमम् ॥ 4  ॥

"Having heard the aforesaid exhortation

of my father and in obedience to the command of an exponent of the Vedas in you, I shall accordingly discharge my foremost duty in the form of killing the ogress, Tāṭakā—there is no doubt about it. (4)

गोबाइाणहिताधांय देशस्य च हिताय च।

तव चैवाप्रमेयस्य वचनं कर्तमुच्छात: १ ५ १

“For the purpose of doing good to the cows and the Brāhmanas and in the interest of this region as well as in your own interest (in the shape of your gratification) I am prepared to do your bidding, possessed as you are of immeasurable glory.” (5)

एवमुक्ला धनुमेधे बद्ध्या मृष्टिमरिंदम:।

न्यायोपमकरोत् तीक्षे दिष्ग: शब्देन नावयन् ॥ 6  ॥

Saying so and clenching his left fist around the middle of his bow, Śri Rāma (who was capable of taming his enemy) produced a sharp twang, making the quarters resound with loud reverberations. (6)

तेन शब्देन विक्सात्सताकावनवासिन: ।

ताटका च सुसंकुढ़ा तेन शब्देन मोहिता ॥ 7  ॥

The dwellers in the forest haunted by Tāṭakā (viz., the followers of Tāṭakā) were

had gone out to practise austerities, the demons, hard pressed by the heavenly army, sought the wife of Bhrgu for protection and how the latter, who accordingly tried to destroy the gods including Lord Viṣnu, was subsequently killed by Lord Viṣnu at the request of Indra.

*VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

terrified by that sound; while Tātakā, who was stunned in the first instance by that sound, got terribly enraged. (7)

तं श्रवद्भिभिन्याय ताशसी क्रोथमूढ्छता।

श्रुला बाध्यब्रत् कृढ़ा यय शब्दो विनिस्युतः ॥ 8  ॥

The ogress was overwhelmed with wrath on hearing that sound and, having heard it, rushed angrily in the direction whence the sound had emanated. (8)

तां दूढ़ा राववः कुढ़ां विकृतां विकृतानाम्।

प्रमाणोपनित्वूढ़ां च लक्ष्मणं से3प्रथभात् ॥ 9  ॥

Seeing her enraged and deformed with a mis-shapen countenance and monstrous in size, the celebrated Śri Rāma, a scion of Raghu, addressed Lakṣmaṇa as follows: (9)

पष्य लक्ष्मण यक्षिण्या भैरवं द्राकर्ण वपु: ।

भिघोरन् दर्शनादस्य भीकर्णां हदयानि च ॥ 10  ॥

"Behold, O Lakṣmana, the formidable and fearful body of the Yakṣa woman; the hearts of the timorous will break at her very sight. (10)

एतां पश्य दुराधर्षा मायाबलसमपित्तात्।

विनिवृत्ता करोमध्य हतकाणीयनासिकाम् ॥ 11  ॥

"See how I put her to flight today once she has been deprived of her ears and the tip of her nose, even though she is difficult to subdue and equipped with the power of Māyā (conjuring tricks). (11)

नहोनामुतहे हन्तु स्वीरभावेन रक्षिताम्।

वीर्यं चार्या गति चैव हत्यामिति हि मे मति: ॥ 12  ॥

"I do not really feel inclined to kill her, protected as she is by her womanhood. Let me put an end to her prowess (capacity to worst others) as well as to her power of motion by depriving her of her hands and feet and thereby rendering her incapable of further devastation: such indeed is my resolve." (12)

एवं बूबाणो रामे तु ताटका क्रोधामूच्छिता।

उद्यम बाई गर्जनी राममेवाध्यथावत । 13  ॥

Even while Śrī Rāma was speaking thus to Laksāmana, Tāṭakā, overwhelmed with anger, rushed towards Rāma himself, lifting up her arms and roaring. (13)

विश्वामित्रतु ब्रह्मार्थीकृरोपाधिभत्सर्ये ताम् ।

स्वस्ति रावयोरस्तु जयं चैवाध्यभापत् ॥ 14  ॥

Threatening her with the sound of 'hum', the Brāhmaṇa sage Viśwāmitra, however, exclaimed saying "Good luck to the two scions of Raghu!" and further raised a shout of "Victory!" (14)

उदधुबाना राजो घोर ताटका राघवावृषी।

रजोमेघेन महता मुहूर्ते सा व्यमोहयत् ॥ 15  ॥

Raising plentiful dust, the said Tātaka perplexed both the scions of Raghu with a huge cloud of dust for an hour or so. (15)

ततो मायां समास्थाय शिलावर्षेण राघवी।

अवाकिरत सुमहता ततशुक्रोधि राघव: ॥ 16  ॥

Then, falling back upon conjuring tricks, she covered the two scions of Raghu with a tremendous shower of rocks. Thereupon Śrī Rāma, a scion of Raghu, flew into a rage. (16)

शिलावर्षे महत् तत्या: शरवर्षेण राघव: ।

प्रतिवार्योपाधवन्या: करी चिच्छेद पत्रिभि: ॥ 17  ॥

Parrying the copious shower of rocks sent down by her with a counter shower of shafts, Śrī Rāma cut off her arms with arrows even as she came running towards him. (17)

ततिश्छभुर्जा श्रानामध्याशे परिरजर्जीम्।

सौमित्रिकरोत् क्रीधाद्धुतकर्णग्रनासिकाम् ॥ 18  ॥

Then out of anger Lakṣmaṇa (son of Sumitra, the second wife of Dáśaratha) deprived her of her ears and the tip of her nose while she was roaring close by exhausted, with her arms severed. (18)

कामस्पधरा सा तु कृत्वा रूपायचनेकश: ।

अन्तर्धानं गता यक्षी मोहयन्ती स्वामायया ॥ 19  ॥

Assuming numerous forms, the said Yakşa woman, however, capable as she



was of taking any form at will, went out of sight, mystifying the two brothers by her conjuring tricks. (19)

अस्पवर्ष विमुईन्ती भैरव विचचार सा।

तत्सतावमवर्षण कीर्यमाणी समन्त: ॥ 20  ॥

दूढ़ा गाधिसुतः श्रीमानिदं वचनमब्बवीत्।

अलं ते घृणया राम पार्येचा तुटचारिणी ॥ 21  ॥

यज्ञिचक्रति यक्षी पुरा वर्थेत मायया।

वध्यतां तावदेवैषा पुरा संख्या प्रवर्तते ॥ 22  ॥

Pouring a terrible shower of rocks, she freely moved about hither and thither. Seeing them being covered by a shower of stones on all sides, the glorious Viśwāmitra, son of Gādhi, tendered the following advice to them: "Have done with your tenderness, O Rāma! This sinful Yakṣa woman of wicked conduct, interfering as she does with sacrificial performances, should be got rid of even before she gains strength through her conjuring tricks. The twilight is fast approaching there. (20-22)

रक्षांसि संध्याकाले तु दुर्धर्शिण भवन्ति हि।

इल्युक्तः स तु तां यक्षीमप्रवृट्वाभिवर्षिणीम्।। 23  ॥

दर्शप्रेआद्ववैधित्वं तां करोध स सायकैः।

सा रूद्धा बाणजालेन मायाबलसमवित्ता। 24  ॥

अभिपटुत्राव काकुत्थं लक्ष्मणं च विनेतुद्यो।

तामापतन्तों वेगेन विकान्तामशनीमिव। 25  ॥

शरगोपार्सि विद्याथ सा पपात ममार च।

तां हतां भीमसंकाशां द्वुषा सुरपतिस्तदा। 26  ॥

साधु साध्विति काकुत्थं सुराश्रायधिपूजयन्।

उवाच परमप्रीतः सहसाक्षः पुरंदरः ॥ 27  ॥

सुराश्रि सर्वे संहद्धा विश्वाभिमत्रशाब्बुव्न्।

मुने कोशिक भई ते सेन्द्रा: सर्वे महरूणा: ॥ 28  ॥

तोतिधात: कर्मणोनेन स्नेहं दर्शय राधवे।

प्रजापतेः कुशाश्थ्य पुत्रान् सत्यपराक्रमान् ॥ 29  ॥

तपोबलभुतो ब्रह्नन् राधवाय निवेदय।

पारभूतश्र ते ब्रह्मस्वतानुगमने ततः ॥ 30  ॥

"For in the evening, really speaking, the ogres are hard to overcome." Showing his skill in hitting a target (not visible to the eye) with the help of the sound coming from it, the celebrated Śri Rama, thus addressed

by Viśwāmitra, impeded that notorious Yakṣa woman, who was covering them with a shower of stones, with his own arrows. Intercepted with a network of arrows the ogress, equipped as she was with the power of conjuring tricks, ran roaring towards Śri Rāma, a scion of Kakuttha, and Laksmana. Śri Rāma hit her in the breast with a shaft as she came rushing like a thunderbolt discharged with force by Indra, with the result that she fell down dead. Seeing her, so terrible of aspect, dead, Indra, the ruler of gods, as well as the other gods applauded Śri Rāma, a scion of Kakuttha, saying "Well done! Bravo !!" Highly pleased, the thousand-eyed Indra (the demolisher of strongholds) as well as all the gods, extremely delighted, presently said to Viśwāmitra as follows: "May good betide you, O Viśwāmitra, a scion of Kuśa ! All the hosts of gods including Indra (their ruler) stand gratified with this feat. Please show your affection towards Śri Rāma, a scion of Raghu. Impart to Śri Rāma the knowledge of the missiles presided over by the sons of Kṛśaśwa—a lord of created beings—possessed of unfailing prowess and wielding great might acquired through austerities. He is worthy of receiving your favour and is devoted to your service, O holy Brāhmana!

(23-30)

कतव्यं सुमहत् कर्म सुराणां राजस्मुना।

एवमुक्ल्वा सुरा: सर्वे जगमूष्टोव हावयसम् ॥ 31  ॥

विश्वाभिरं पूजयन्ततः संख्या प्रवर्ते।

ततो मुनिवर: प्रीतस्ताटकावधतोषिति: ॥ 32  ॥

मूर्धि राममुपाधाय इदं ववनमप्रबवीत्।

इहाछ रजर्नीं राम वसाम गुभदर्शन ॥ 33  ॥

श्व: प्रभाते गमिष्यामस्तद्धाभपदं मम ।

विश्वाभिरवचः श्रुला हृटचे दर्शराधासक्न: ॥ 34  ॥

उवास रजर्नीं तत्र ताटकाया वने सुखम्।

मुक्तशायं वनं तच्च तस्मिनेव तदाहनि ।

रमपीयं विबभाजा यथा चेत्ररथं वनम् ॥ 35  ॥

A great object of gods is going to be

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

accomplished by the prince, Śrī Rāma." Saying so all the gods disappeared into the heavens, extolling Viśwāmitra, and then the twilight set in. Lovingly smelling the crown of the head of Śrī Rāma, Viśwāmitra, the foremost of hermits, who felt consoled by the death of Tāṭakā, then addressed the following words to Śrī Rāma: "Let us spend this night here, O good-looking Rāma! Next morning at sunrise we shall proceed to the site of my well-known hermitage." Pleased to hear the words of Viśwāmitra, Śrī Rāma, son of Daśaratha, happily spent the night in that forest, which had so long been the

haunt of Tāṭakā. Nay, the aforesaid forest, instantly rid of molestation that very day, shone brightly like the delightful grove of Caitraratha (belonging to Kubera and existing in his capital, Alakā). (31-35)

निह्त तां चघसुतां स राम: प्रश्यमान: सुरिसदुसंधैः ।

उवास तम्मन् मुनिना सहैव प्रभातेवंता प्रतिबोध्यमानः ॥ 36  ॥

Having disposed of the aforesaid Tātakā, (the daughter of a Yaksa) and being applauded by hosts of gods and Siddhas, the celebrated Śri Rāma halted for the night in the forest in the company of the sage, being awakened by the latter towards sunrise. (36)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाल्ये बालकारणे चड्विंशे: सर्पि: ॥ 26  ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-six in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

सर्विश्रः सर्गः

Canto XXVII

Gratified with the death of Tātaka, Viśwāmitra imparts to Śri Rāma the knowledge of the various missiles

अथ तां रजनीमृष्य विश्वामिगो महायशा:।

प्रहस्य राघवं वाक्यमुवाच मधुरस्वरम् ॥ 1  ॥

Having rested during that night (in the forest haunted so long by Tāṭakā), the highly illustrious Viśwāmitra smiled and addressed the following words in a sweet tone to Śrī Rāma : (1)

परितृष्टोप्रिस्म भई ते राजपुर्र महायशः। प्रीत्या परमया युक्तो ददामध्यसार्णि सर्वशः ॥ 2  ॥ देवासुरगणग्न् वायि सग्रथवौरगन् भूवि। यैरमित्रान् प्रसह्ञाजो वर्शीकृत्व जयिष्यसि ॥ 3  ॥

"I am highly pleased with you, O highly glorious prince! May prosperity attend you! Full of supreme affection I hereby impart to you the knowledge of all the missiles, whereby you will forcibly bring under control and conquer in battle all your enemies on earth and even hosts of gods

and demons including the Gandharvas and Nāgas. (2-3)

तानि दिख्यानि भई ते ददाम्यस्थापि सर्वश:।

दण्डघकं महद् दिख्यं तव दास्यामि राघच ॥ 4  ॥

धर्मकं ततो वीर कालचकं तथैव च।

विण्यणृकं तथात्युगमैन्दं चकं तथैव च ॥ 5  ॥

वज्रमसं नशेष्ठि शैलूतरं तथा ।

अयं ब्रह्मारश्रवे ऐपीकमपि रायव ॥ 6  ॥

"I deliver to you all those celestial missiles, may good betide you! I shall deliver to you, O scion of Raghu, the great and ethereal Dānḍa-Cakra and then the Dharma-Cakra, O gallant prince, as well as the Kāla-Cakra, also the Viṣnu-Cakra as well as the most formidable Indra-Cakra and the missile in the shape of a thunderbolt, O jewel among men, similarly the Śula of Śiva, the best among all presided over by Lord Śiva, as



well as the missile called Brahmaśira and even the Aisika (that employed through the medium of a reed, rush or stem of grass), O scion of Raghu! (4-6)

ददामि ते महाबाहो ब्राह्मस्वमनुत्तमम्।

गदे डे चैव काकुल्य मोदकी शिखारी शुभे ॥ 7  ॥

प्रदीते नरशादूल प्रयच्छामि नुपात्मज।

धर्मशामहं राम कालपाङ्ग तथैव च ॥ 8  ॥

वाकर्ण पाशमसचं च ददाम्यहमनुत्तमम्।

अशनी डे प्रयच्छामि शुक्राङ्गे रघुनन्दन ॥ 9  ॥

"I am going to deliver to you, O mighty-armed prince, the missile presided over by Brahmā, which is excelled by no other missile, and hand over to you, O tiger among men, a pair of blessed maces, Modaki and Sikhari by name, shining brightly, O scion of Kakutstha ! I also deliver to you, O Rāma, the noose possessed by Dharma, the god of piety, as well as that wielded by Kāla, the Time-Spirit and the superb missile in the form of the noose employed by Varuna, the god presiding over the waters. I further deliver to you, O scion of Raghu, a pair of Asanis, one dry and the other moist. (7-9)

ददामि चासं वैपाकमसं नारायणं तथा।

आननेयमसं दयितं शिखरं नाम नामत: ११० ॥

"I also deliver to you the missile presided over by Lord Śiva, the Wielder of the bow named Pināka and the missile presided over by Lord Nārāyaṇa as well as the well-known missile Śīkhara by name, presided over by and beloved of Agni, the god of fire. (10)

वायव्यं प्रथमं नाम ददामि तव चानच।

असरं हविशगे राम क्रोघुमसं तथैव च।। 11 ।।

"I further deliver to you, O sinless one, the missile par excellence presided over by the wind-god, the missile named Hayasīras, presided over by Lord Hayagriva, who bears the head of a horse, as well as the missile called Krauñca. (11)

शक्तिर्वयं च काकुत्थ ददामि तव रावव।

कड़ालं मुसल घोर कापालमथ किड्जूणीम् ॥ 12  ॥

वधार्थ रक्षसां यानि ददाम्येतानि सर्वश: ।

वैद्यारं महास्त्रं च नदनं नाम नामतः ॥ 13  ॥

असित्रलं महाबाहो ददामि नुवरात्मज।

गत्थवर्मसं द्विति मोहनं नाम नामतः ॥ 14  ॥

प्रस्वापनं प्रणमनं दंधि सौम्यं च राषव।

वर्धंगी श्रोषणं चैव संतापनविलापनं ॥ 15  ॥

मादनं चैव दुर्धर्षि कंदरपंद्धिति तथा।

गात्थवर्मसं द्विति मानवं नाम नामतः ॥ 16  ॥

“I hand over to you, O Rāma, a scion of Kakutstha, a pair of Sāktis (javelins—the one presided over by Lord Viṣṇu and the other by Lord Śiva) as also Kankāla, the dreadful Musala, the Kāpāla and Kinkīnī, missiles wielded by the demons. I deliver to you all these missiles, which are capable of destroying the ogres. I hand over to you, O mighty-armed son of Daśaratha (a jewel among men), a great missile used by the Vidyadharas, viz., the well-known excellent sword, Nandana by name. I further deliver to you, O scion of Raghu, the celebrated missile beloved of the Gandharvas, Mohana by name (so-called because it is capable of stupefying the enemy), the soporific missile, Praswāpana, the gentle missile Praśamana, which possesses the virtue of pacifying the anger of the enemy, as well as the missiles Varsana, Śoṣana, Santāpana and Vilāpana, which possess the virtues of discharging showers, sucking up moisture, releasing excessive heat and making the enemy wail, respectively, as well as the formidable missile Mādana, which inebriates the enemy, beloved of Kandarpa, the god of love, and the well-known missile beloved of the Gandharvas, Mānava by name. (12-16)

पैशाचमसं द्यितं मोहनं नाम नामतः ।

प्रतीच्छ नरशालूत राजपूत्र महायशः ॥ 17  ॥

तामसं नरशालूत सोमनं च महावलम् ।

संवर्ते चैव दुर्धर्ष मौसलं च नुपात्मवः ॥ 18  ॥

सत्यमसं महाबाहो तथा मायामयं परम् ।

सौरे तेज:प्रभं नाम परतेजोउपकर्णम् ॥ 19  ॥

सोमासं शिशिरं नाम लाष्यमसं सूद्राफणम् ।

दाफणं च भगस्याधि श्रीतेभूमय भानवम् ॥ 20  ॥

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

"Receive from me, O illustrious prince, O tiger among men, the well-known missile beloved of the fiends, Mohana by name, so-called because it infatuates the enemy, as also the missiles Tāmasa and the mighty Saumana, O tiger among men, as well as Samvarta and the formidable Mausala, O son of King Daśaratha, the missile known by the name of Satya as also the great missile called Māyāmasya, O mighty-armed one, the missile presided over by the sun-god, Tejahprabha by name, which takes away the glory of the enemy, the missile presided over by the moon-god, Śiśira by name, the most formidable missile presided over by Twaṣṭa, the architect of gods, the dreadful missile of Bhaga (one of the twelve sons of Aditi, presiding over the sun by turns month after month) as well as the missile presided over by Manu, known by the name of Śiteṣu. (17-20)

एतान् राम महावाहो कामस्पान् महावलान्।

गृहाण परमोदारान् क्षिपमेव नृपात्मजा ॥ 21  ॥

"Receive at once, O mighty-armed Rāma, these very powerful and supremely beneficent missiles capable of taking any form at will, O son of King Dáśaratha!" (21)

स्थितस्तु प्रावसुखो भूला शुचिर्मुर्निवरस्तदा ।

ददौ रामाय सुप्रोतो मन्त्रयाममनुतमम् ॥ 22  ॥

Getting purified through ablutions etc., and sitting with his face turned towards the east, Viswāmitra, the foremost of hermits, who was highly delighted, imparted to Śri Rāma a string of Mantras (sacred texts capable of invoking the missiles) unexcelled by others in their field. (22)

सर्वसंप्रहणं येषां दैवतेरिप दुर्लंभम्।

तात्यस्वाणि तदा विषो रावयावय व्यवेद्यत् ॥ 23  ॥

The Brāḥmana, Viśwāmitra, then delivered to Śrī Rāma, as well as to Lakṣmana the missiles which could not be easily retained in one's memory in their entirety even by gods. (23)

जपतस्तु मुनेस्तय विश्वामित्रस्य धीमतः ।

उपतस्थूमैहाहणि सर्वायस्त्राणि राधवम् ॥ 24  ॥

Even while that intelligent sage Viśwāmitra was silently repeating the Mantras, embodying the said missiles, all the missiles, worthy of great adoration as they were, appeared before Śri Rāma in their shining ethereal forms. (24)

क्रच्छु मुदिता रामं सर्वे प्राझलयस्तदा।

इमे च परमोदार विक्कारस्त्व याच्च ॥ 25  ॥

यद् यदिष्छसि भर्ते ते तत् सर्वे करवाम वै ।

ततो रामः प्रसत्राता तैरित्युक्तो महावलै: ॥ 26  ॥

प्रतिगृह्न च काकुत्थ: समालध्य च पाणिणा ।

मानसा मे भविष्यक्षिति तान्यथचोदयत् ॥ 27  ॥

Nay, full of joy, all spoke as follows with folded hands (as a mark of respect) to Śri Rāma: “Here do we stand as your servants, O supermely generous Śri Rāma, a scion of Raghu ! We are prepared to do all that you would have us do. May good betide you!” Addressed thus by those mighty missiles in living form, Śri Rāma, a scion of Kakutstha, thereupon accepted them with a cheerful mind as his own and, stroking them with his hand, commanded them as follows: “Appear in my mind whenever I think of you.” (25-27)

ततः प्रीतमना रामो विश्वामित्रं महामुपिनम्।

अधिवाघ महातेजा गमनायोपचक्रमे ॥ 28  ॥

Saluting the great sage Viśwāmitra, the highly glorious Śrī Rāma with a delighted mind then got ready to proceed further. (28)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्याकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाराएं सतविशंश: सर्प: ॥ 27  ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-seven in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Válmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.



अटाविंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXVIII

At the request of Śri Rāma the sage Viśwāmitra instructs him as well as Laksmaṇa in the process of calling back the missiles and delivers some more missiles to them

प्रतिगृहा ततोउस्वाणि प्रहुचवद्न: शृत्रि: ।

गच्छनेव च काकुत्थ्यो विश्वामिभ्याङ्गवतिन! १ १ ॥

When just about to proceed further from the forest haunted so long by Tātaka, after receiving the missiles from Viśwāmitra, the all-pure Śri Rāma, a scion of Kakutstha, with a most cheerful countenance now addressed Viśwāmitra as follows: (1)

गृहीताव्योरिस भगवन् दुराधर्ष: सुरैरपि।

अस्वागां त्वहीमच्छामि संहारान् मुपिनुपाय २ १ १

"Having received the knowledge of invoking missiles from you, O omnipotent sage, I can no longer be easily overpowered even by gods. I also wish to learn the Mantras capable of calling them back once discharged, O jewel among sages!" (2)

एवं बुवति काकुत्थे विश्वामिति महातपा:।

संहारान् व्याजहाराध्य शुतिमान् सूत्रतः शुचि: ॥ 3  ॥

Even while Śri Rāma was speaking thus, the great ascetic Viśwāmitra of noble vows, possessed as he was of extraordinary firmness and purity, forthwith taught to him as well as to Laksmana the Mantras capable of calling the missile(s) back. (3)

सत्यवन्तं सत्यकांति धृष्टं रभसमेव च।

प्रतिरातरं नाम पराक्ष्यमवाक्युमवम् ॥ 4  ॥

लक्ष्यालक्ष्याविमी चैव दुकानाभ्युनाभको ।

दणाक्षशतवक्यो च दशशर्षीशगतोरते ॥ 5  ॥

पद्यनाभमहानाभौ दुन्दुनाभस्वनाभको ।

न्योतिथि शकुनं चैव नैरास्विमलावुभो ॥ 6  ॥

योगंधरविनिजी चे दैत्यप्रमथनौ तथा ।

शृत्रविबाहुमहावाहुनिकलिंविकचरतथा ।

साधिमाली धृतिमाली वृत्तिमान् कचिरस्तथा ॥ 7  ॥

प्रियः सोमनसप्रचेव विधृतमकरापुभे।

परवीरं रति चैव धनधान्यो च रायाव ॥ 8  ॥

कामकपं कामकर्चिं मोहमावरणं तथा।

जुषभंकं सर्पनाथं च पन्यानवरणों तथा ॥ 9  ॥

कृशाशतनयान् राम भास्वरान् कामकलिपणः ।

प्रतीच्छ मम भई ते पात्रभृतोरसि साच व ॥ 10  ॥

He said: “Receive from me, O Rāma, a scion of Raghu, since you are a fit recipient, other glorious missiles (sons of Krśaśśwa), capable of assuming any form at will and bearing the names of Satyavān, Satyakirti, Dhrṣta and Rabhasa, Pratihāratara, Parāñmukha and Avāñmukha, Lakṣya and Alaksya as well as the yonder Drḍhanābha and Sunābha, Daśakṣa and Śatavaktra as well as Daśaśirṣa and Satodara, Padmanābha and Mahānābha, Dundunābha and Swanābha, Jyotish as well as Śakuna, both Nairāṣya and Vimala, Yaugandhara and Vinidra and even so, Daitya and Pramathana, those going by the names of Śucibāhu, Mahābahu, Niṣkali and Viruca, Sārcimāli, Dhrtimāli, Vṛttimān and Rucira, Pitrya as well as Saumanasa, both Vidhūta and Makara, as also Paravira and Rati, Dhana and Dhanya, Kāmarūpa, Kāmaruci, Moha and Āvaraṇa, Jrmbhaka and Sarpanātha, Panthāna and Varuna, O scion of Raghu ! May good betide you !” (4-10)

बाढमित्येव काकुत्थ: प्रहृदेनातरमता।

दिव्यभास्वरद्रोष्ठ मृतिमन्तः सुखप्रदा: ॥ 1  ॥

Śrī Rāma (a scion of Kakuttha) received them with a most cheerful mind, saying, “Amen!” The missiles in their concrete living form were invested with an ethereal and effulgent personality and afforded delight to all. (11)

केन्चिद्वूत्रासरुगा: कौचिद्धू ध्योपायमास्ताय। चन्द्राकसरुगा: कौचित्र प्राङ्गलिपुटास्थाय। १२ १ १

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

Some of them shone like live coal, others were smoky in appearance, while still others were brilliant as the sun and the moon and were inclined forwards with their palms joined together so as to form a cavity. (12)

रामं प्राङ्लियां भूत्वाबूवन् मधुरभाधिण:।

इमे स्म रनशादूल शाधि किं करवाम ते ॥ 13  ॥

Standing with their hollowed palms joined together, they addressed Śri Rāma in sweet accents as follows: “Here we are, O tiger among men! Pray, instruct us what we can do for you.” (13)

गम्यतामिति तानाह यथेष्टं रघुनन्दन:।

मानसा: कार्यकालेषु साहाख्ये मे करिष्णय ॥ 14  ॥

Śri Rāma (a scion of Raghu) replied to them saying, “Let you be gone, as you will, for the present. Appearing in my mind whenever I recall you, you should render assistance to me in times of emergency.” (14)

अथ ते राममामन्य कृत्वा चापि प्रदक्षिणम्।

एवमसिति काकुत्थयुक्लवा जमयुर्थायगतम् ॥ 15  ॥

Taking leave of Śri Rāma and also going round him clockwise as a mark of respect and addressing the scion of Kakutstha in the words “Be it so!” they withdrew even as they had come. (15)

स च तान् रायवो जात्वा विश्वामित्रं महामुपिनम्।

गच्छत्रेवाथ मधुरं शलक्षणं वचनमब्रवीत्। 16  ॥।

Having come to know them, Śri Rāma forthwith addressed the following sweet and delightful words to the great sage Viśwāmitra even while moving alongwith him: (16)

किमेतन्मेघसंकांशं पवंतस्याविदूरतः।

वृक्षराण्डमितो भाति परं कोतूहलं हिि मे ॥ 17  ॥

“What is this cluster of trees, that looks from this place like a mass of clouds in view of its dark colour and density, not very far from the yonder mountain? Great indeed is my curiosity in this behalf. (17)

दर्शनीयं मृगाकीर्ण मनोहरमतीव च। नानापकारैः शकुनेर्वल्पुभारेषरंतकृतम् ॥ 18  ॥

"It is so pleasing to the sight, extremely soul-ravishing, full of deer and graced with various species of sweetly warbling birds. (18)

निस्सुता: सभो मुनिश्रिक कान्ताराद रोमहर्षणात्।

अनया त्ववगछामि देशस्य सुखलन्तया ॥ 19  ॥

"From the happy look as indicated above of this tract of land, to tell you the truth, I presume we have emerged, O jewel among sages, from the forest haunted so long by the ogress Tātaka, which made one's hair stand on end by its fearful aspect. (19)

सर्वे मे शंस भगवन् कन्याश्रमवर्द निविदम्।

सम्पाता यत्र ते पापा ब्रह्मणा दुष्टचारिणः ॥ 20  ॥

तव यज्ञस्य विश्वभाय दुरात्मानो महामुने।

भगवंस्तस्य को देशः सा यत्र तव याजिक्ति ॥ 21  ॥

रश्रितत्यका क्रिया ब्रह्न मय वध्य्याङ्ग राक्षसाः ।

एत्न्त सर्वे मुनिश्रेष्ठ श्रोतुमिच्छायम्बे प्रभो ॥ 22  ॥

"Whose hermitage does this site really contain? What is the locality of your hermitage, where those sinful, wicked and evil-minded slayers of Brāhmanas make their inroads for the interruption of your sacrificial performance, O great and glorious sage, nay, where your sacrificial activity requires to be guarded and the ogres deserve to be killed by me, O holy Brāhmaṇa! I wish to hear all this, O powerful jewel among sages!" (20-22)

इत्याई श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकार्डेउषाद्विंश: सर्ग: ॥ 28  ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-eight in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Valmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

[Unreadable]



एकोनत्रिंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXIX

Viswāmitra tells Śri Rāma the history of Siddhāśrama and arrives at his own hermitage with the two brothers

अथ तस्याप्रमेयस्य वचनं प्रिपृष्ठतः ।

विश्वामित्र महातेजा व्याख्यातुमुपचकमे ॥ 1  ॥

Hearing the question of Śri Rāma, who though possessed of infinite glory made inquiries as above, the highly glorious Viśwāmitra proceeded to make answer as follows: (1)

इह राम महाबाहो विद्युदैवनमकृत: ।

वर्षिणि सुबह्नीह तथा युगशतानि च ॥ 2  ॥

तपश्रणयोगार्थयुवास सुमहातपा: ।

एष पूर्वांशमो राम वामनस्य महातनम्: ॥ 3  ॥

सिद्धाश्रम इति स्थात: सिद्धो हाय महातना: ।

एतस्मिबेव काले तु राजा वैरीचनिर्विल: ॥ 4  ॥

निर्जित्य देवतगणान् सेन्द्रान् सहमरुद्रणाणन् ।

कारयामास तद्रान्यं त्रिषु लोकेषु विश्रुतः ॥ 5  ॥

"Here in this very grove, O mighty-armed Râma, Lord Viṣṇu, the adored of all gods, who is noted for His exceptional asceticism, stayed for hundreds of revolutions of the four Yugas and many more years for practising austerities and Yoga (concentration of mind). Here stands the former hermitage of Lord Vâmana, the divine Dwarf—who is no other than the Supreme Spirit—known by the name of Siddhâśrama; for it was here that Lord Viṣṇu, who is noted for his great asceticism, realized His end prior to His descent in the form of Vâmana. It was during this very period that King Bali, the son of Virocana and grandson of Prahlâda, ruled over the kingdom of Indra and became well-known in all the three worlds, having thoroughly conquered the hosts of gods including Indra, their ruler, as well as the forty-nine wind-gods. (2-5)

यजं चकार सुमहानसुरेन्दो महाबल: १

बलैस्तु यजमानस्य देवा: सारिफनुरोगमा: १

समाग्य स्वयं चैव विण्यामूचिराश्रमे १६ ११

"The very mighty Bali, the ruler of demons, who was exceptionally great, initiated a sacrifice. While Bali was proceeding with the sacrifice, the gods along with Agni, the god of fire, who headed them, personally met Lord Viṣṇu, who had been practising austerities in this very hermitage and submitted to Him as follows: (6)

बलिवैरीचनिर्विष्णो घजते ग्रजमुत्तमम्।

उसमामब्रते तस्मिन स्वकार्यमिभप्रद्यात्मा ॥ 9  ॥

“Bali, the son of Virocana, O omnipresent Lord, has commenced a great sacrifice. Let the object of Your proteges (gods) be fully accomplished while he has not yet concluded his sacred observance.

(7)

घे चेनमभिवर्तैने याचितार इतस्ततः ।

यच्य यत्र यथावच्च सर्वे तेभ्य: प्रयच्छति १८ ॥

'To those who approach him from here and there with some solicitation, he duly gives whatever object they ask and of whatever category. (8)

स लं सुरहिताथय मायायोगमुपाध्रातः ।

वामन्तं गतो विष्णो कुरु कल्याणमुत्तमम् ॥ 9  ॥

‘Therefore, assuming the semblance of a dwarf by establishing contact with Maya (the energy which veils Your true nature and invests You with a seemingly human or mortal character) for the sake of doing good to gods, be pleased to serve our best interest.’ (9)

एतस्मिन्तरे राम कश्यपो3निसमप्रभः ।

अदित्या सहितो राम दीय्यमान इवोजसा ॥ 10  ॥

"In the meantime, O Rāma, the delight of all, there appeared on the scene Sage Kaśyapa, resplendent as fire, accompanied

*VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

by his wife, Aditi, as though glowing with his incarnate glory. (10)

देवीसहायो भगवान् दिख्यं वर्षसहसकम्।

जतं समाथ्य वरदं तृष्यव मधुसूतनम् ॥ 11  ॥

Having concluded his sacred observance extending over a thousand celestial years (equivalent to three hundred and sixty thousand human years), in the company of his wife, the glorious sage eulogized Lord Viṣṇu, the Destroyer of the demon Madhu, who was disposed to confer a boon on him as follows: (11)

तपोमयं तपोराशिं तपोमूर्ति तपात्मकम्।

तपसा त्वां सुतमेन पश्यामि पुरुषोतमम् ॥ 12  ॥

'By virtue of my asceticism duly practised I am able to behold the Supreme Person in You, endowed as You are with abundant asceticism, a repository of asceticism, nay, asceticism incarnate and consisting of asceticism itself. (12)

शरीर तव पश्यामि जगत् सर्वीमदं प्रभो ।

त्वमनादिरिन्द्रिश्यस्वामहं शरणं गत: ॥ 13  ॥

I perceive this entire creation consisting of animate and inanimate beings in Your body, O Lord! You are without beginning and indescribable. I have sought You as my refuge. (13)

तमुवाच हरि: प्रीतः कश्यपं धृतकल्यम्प।

वंर वरव भई ते वराहोंसि मतो मम ॥ 14  ॥

Full of joy Śri Hari replied as follows to the sage Kaśyapa, who had shaken off all impurities: 'Ask of Me a boon of your choice, may good betide you; for you are considered by Me as deserving of favour.' (14)

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य मारीचः कश्यपोउज्वीत्।

अदिल्या देवतानां च मम चैवानुयाचितम् ॥ 15  ॥

वरं वरद सुप्रीतो दतुमहंसि सुज्ञत।

पुत्रलं गच्छ भगवब्रदित्या मम चानघ ॥ 16  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid reply of the Lord, Kaśyapa, the son of Marci, submitted, 'Highly

satisfied as You are, and disposed to confer a boon, O Lord of noble vows, be pleased to grant the favour solicited by Aditi, my wife, and gods as well as by myself. Assume the role of a son to me as also to Aditi, O sinless Lord! (15-16)

भाता भव यवीयांस्तं शकस्यासुरमूदत ।

शोकातर्नां तु देवानां साहस्यं कतुंमहसि ॥ 17  ॥

'Be a younger brother to Indra, O Destroyer of demons! You ought in reality to render help to gods who are stricken with grief at the loss of their kingdom. (17)

अयं सिद्धाश्रमो नाम प्रसादात् ने भविष्यति ।

सिद्धे कर्मणि देवेश उत्तिषु भगवत्रितः ॥ 18  ॥

'By Your grace in the form of Your holy presence here this place will be known by the name of Siddhásrama. Your undertaking in the form of austerities having been successfully concluded, O Ruler of gods, shift Yourself to our abode from this place, O Lord!' (18)

अथ विद्युर्महितजा अदिव्यां समजायत ।

वामर्न रूपमास्थाय वैरोचिनमुपागमत् ॥ 11  ॥

"Now the exceptionally glorious Lord Viṣṇu took His descent through Aditi and, assuming the form of the divine Dwarf, sought the presence of Bali (the son of Virocana, Prahlāda's son). (19)

ग्रीन् पदानथ भिश्रित्या प्रतिगूहा च मेदितीन्।

आक्रल्य लोकॉल्लोकार्थी सर्वलोकाहिते रत: ॥ 20  ॥

महेन्द्राय पुन: प्रादात्रियन्य बलिमोजसा ।

त्रैलोकंयं स महातेजश्रढ़े शक्रबर्गे पुन: ॥ 21  ॥

“Asking of him ground which could be covered by three strides and accepting the offer of land granted by him, the Lord, who sought to have all the three worlds, devoted as He was to the good of the entire creation, covered all the three worlds in three strides, by His all-pervading form and, taming Bali by His divine might, restored them to the great Indra. In this way, the Lord, who is possessed of exceptional

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

glory, placed all the three worlds once more under the lordship of Indra. (20-21)

तेनेव पूर्वमाक्रत आश्रम: श्रमनाशन:।

मयापि भक्या तस्यैव वामनस्योपभुस्ते ॥ 22  ॥

“By that very Lord was this hermitage trodden in the remote past and is accordingly capable of ending the toils of transmigration. It is through devotion to the aforesaid Lord Vâmana alone that this hermitage is being occupied by me too. (22)

एनमाश्रममायाति राक्षसा विरकारिण:।

अत्र ते पुरुषव्याघ हन्तया दुरुचारिणः ॥ 23  ॥

“Ogres interfering with our religious observances make inroads into this hermitage and at this very juncture, O tiger among men, the aforesaid Rāksasas of wicked conduct deserve to be killed by you. (23)

अद्य गच्छामहे राम सिद्धान्धप्रमन्तुनाम्।

तद्धभपरं तात तवायेतद् यथा मम ॥ 24  ॥

"Now let us make our way, O Rāma, to the said Siddhāsrama, unsurpassed by others. The site of this hermitage, my darling, is as much yours, too, as mine since you are none else than Lord Viṣnu, to whom it originally belonged." (24)

इत्युक्त्वा परमप्रतीतो गृह्य रामं सलक्ष्मणम्।

प्रविश्नान्ध्रमवं व्यरोचत महापुनि: ।

शशीश नतनीहारः पुनर्वसूमसप्तिजितः ॥ 25  ॥

Having said so and taking Śri Rāma along with Lakṣmana by the hand, the great sage, Viśwāmitra, entered the limits of the hermitage, full of great delight. While doing so, he shone brightly as the moon free from fog, accompanied by the two stars constituting the constellation Punarvasu. (25)

तं दृष्टा मुनय: सर्वे सिद्धासभिवासिन: ।

उत्पत्योत्पय सहसा विश्वामिभमपुजयन् ॥ 26  ॥

Seeing him come after a long time, with the two distinguished guests, all the

hermits dwelling in the hermitage sprang up in a flurry one after another and paid their homage to Viswāmitra. (26)

यथाई चक्रिने पूर्जा विश्वामिजाय धीमते।

तथैव राजपुत्राभ्यामकुर्बन्नतिथिक्रियम् ॥ 21  ॥

They offered worship to the wise Viśwāmitra according to his deserts and likewise offered hospitality to the two princes, Śri Rāma and Lakṣmana. (27)

मूर्तन्मथ विश्रान्तो राजपुत्राविर्दमो।

प्राझली मुनिशादूलमूचत् रघुनन्दनो ॥ 28  ॥

Having rested a while, the two princes, the scions of Raghu, who were capable of subduing the enemy, forthwith submitted to Viśwāmitra, a tiger among sages, with folded hands as follows : (28)

अष्टोव दीक्षां प्रविश्रा भई ते मुनिपुंगव ।

सिद्धाभोयं विस्दः स्यात् सत्यमसुच्चच्चत ॥ 21  ॥

"God bless you! Go through the ceremony of consecration for the sacrificial performance this very day, O jewel among sages! Let this Siddhāsrama prove to be an abode of success and thereby justify its name and let your word that the ogres deserve to be killed by me (vide verse 23 above) come true." (29)

एवमुक्तो महतोजा विश्वामिभो महापूर्वि: ।

प्रविशेष रात दूरीक्षां नियतो नियतेन्द्रिय: ॥ 30  ॥

Addressed in these words by the two brothers, the highly glorious and eminent Rīsi, Viśwāmitra, who had curbed his senses and mind and was observing sacred vows, forthwith went through the ceremony of consecration for the sacrificial performance going to be undertaken by him. (30)

कुमारावित तां रात्रिमृषिता सुसमाहितो ।

प्रभातकाले चोत्थाय पूर्वाँ संध्यामुपास्य च। 31  ॥

प्रशृची परमं जाख्यं समाय पियमेत च ।

हुतारिनहोत्रामसीनं विश्वामित्रमवन्दताम। 32  ॥

Having reposed during that night with a calm and composed mind and rising at



dawn next morning, the two lads, who resembled Skanda and Viśakha, the two sons of Lord Śiva, and were exceedingly pure by nature offered prayer to the morning twilight after getting purified through bath

etc., and having finished the Japa (recitation) of the holy Gāyatri, the foremost of Mantras, according to rules, greeted Viśwāmitra, who was sitting at ease having mentally* poured oblations into the sacred fire. (31-32)

इत्यार्थ श्रीमदामायणे वाल्मीकोंये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनार्शस: सर्ग: ॥ 29  ॥

Thus ends Canto Twenty-nine in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

त्रिंश: सर्गे:

Canto XXX

Śri Rāma protects the sacrifice of Viśwāmitra against the onslaught of the Rākṣasas and gets rid of them

अथ तो देशकालज्ञी राजपुत्राविर्दमो।

देशे काले च वावक्यावबूतां कौशिकं वच: ॥ 1  ॥

Now the two princes, who knew what is appropriate at a particular time and place and were also aware of the kind of words that should be spoken at a particular time and place and who were capable of subduing the enemy, addressed the following words to Viśwamitra, a scion of Kuśa: (1)

भगवज्छोतुमिच्छावो यस्मिन् काले निशाचरगे ।

संरक्षणयी तो बृहि नातिवर्तेत ततक्षणम् ॥ 2  ॥

“O venerable sage, we both should like to hear at what particular moment of time the two ogres, Mārica and Subahu, have to be guarded against by us. That moment should not escape unnoticed.” (2)

एवं बूवाणो काकुत्स्वी त्वरमाणो युवुत्स्वया ।

सर्वे ते मुनय: प्रीतः प्रशासुरुपायकजी ॥ 3  ॥

Full of delight, all those hermits who were present there on that occasion applauded the two princes, descended in the line of Kakuttsha, who spoke as

aforesaid, impatient because of their eagerness to fight with the demons. (3)

अखप्रभूति पड़्ज़ां रक्षतां राघबी युवाम्।

दीक्षां गतो होष मुनिमर्शित्वं च गमिष्यति ॥ 4  ॥

They replied on behalf of the Rsi: "From this day onward keep you vigil for six days and nights continuously, O scions of Raghu! We tell you this because this sage, Viswāmitra, has already gone through the rite of consecration and will observe strict silence all these days as he is doing even now." (4)

तौ तु तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा राजपुरौ यशस्विनो।

अनिर्वे पडहोरानं तपोवममरक्षताम् ॥ 5  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid answer made by the hermits the two illustrious princes for their part guarded the grove hallowed by austerities for six days and nights continuously without even a wink of sleep. (5)

उसासांचकतुर्दीरो वनौ परमधविनो।

रखतुर्मुभिनवरं विश्वभाविमर्पिरेदो ॥ 6  ॥

* It is laid down in the scriptures that having gone through the ceremony of consecration for a sacrificial performance one should no longer pour daily oblations (chiefly consisting of milk, oil and sour gruel) into the sacred fire, nor perform the half-monthly sacrifices performed on the new moon and the full moon and known by the names of Darśa and Pūrnamāsa respectively—दीक्षामध्ये नानिन्द्रों न दर्शपूर्णमासाम्प्यां वजेत.

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

Full of vigilance and armed with exquisite bows, the two heroes, capable as they were of subduing the enemy, kept by the side of Viśwāmitra, the foremost of sages, and guarded him as well as his sacrifice. (6)

अथ काले गते तस्मिन् षडेड़नि तताद३गते।

सीमिश्रम्बवीद् रागो यतो भव समाहितः ॥ 9  ॥

Now as time rolled on (five days had elapsed) and the sixth day (night), the most important on which the Soma juice is extracted, arrived, Śri Rāma said to Lakṣmana, “Be prepared for a tussle and be vigilant.” (7)

रामस्यैं बुवाणस्य वृत्तिस्य युवुसया।

प्रजन्याल ततो वैदि: सोपाध्यायपुरोहिता ॥ 8  ॥

Even as Śri Rāma, who was impatient because of his eagerness to fight with the Rāksasas, spoke as aforesaid, the fire at the sacrificial altar at once blazed forth in the presence of the Brahmā, the superintending priest viz., Viśwāmitra and the other priests officiating at the sacrifice. (8)

सदभंचमस्वृक्का ससमित्कुसुमोच्या।

विश्वरामेघन सहिता वेदिर्जनाल सल्विजा ॥ 9  ॥

The fire at the altar, which was distinguished by the presence of the sacred Kuśa grass, a Camasa (a wooden vessel, generally of a square shape and furnished with a handle, used at sacrifices for drinking the Soma juice), a Struk (a sort of large wooden ladle used for pouring clarified butter on a sacrificial fire and properly made of Palāśa or Khadira wood and about as long as an arm, with a receptacle at the end of the size of a hand), pieces of firewood and heaps of flowers for decoration and worship and was surrounded by Viśwāmitra and the other priests—blazed forth all of a sudden, heralding the onslaught of the Rakṣasas.

(9)

मन्वच्च यथान्यायं यज्ञोसौ सम्बवर्ते।

आकाशे च महाऊळ्व: प्रातुरासीद् भयानक: ॥ 10  ॥

The sacrificial performance in question duly proceeded, accompanied by the recitation of sacred texts and presently there arose a loud and fearful clamour in the sky. (10)

आवार्य गर्नम मेघो यथा प्रावृषि दूर्यते।

तथा मायां विकुर्बाणी ग्राससावध्याथाताम् ॥ 11  ॥

मात्रिश्र सुबाहुश तयोग्नचरास्तथा।

आगमय भीमसंकाशा रधिरोचनावगुर्जन् ॥ 12  ॥

Just as a cloud appears during the monsoon, enveloping the sky, the two Rāksasas, Mārica and Subāhu, swooped down upon the sacrificial altar spreading their Māyā (sorcery). They as well as their followers of terrible aspect presently arrived and rained torrents of blood as well as of flesh, pus and so on. (11-12)

तां तेन कधिरोधेण वेदौं वीक्ष्य समुक्षिताम्।

सहसाधिष्ठतो रामस्तानपर्यन्त ततो दिवि ॥ 13  ॥

Clearly perceiving the altar in question drenched with that shower of blood, Śrī Rāma ran forth at once to discover the cause and presently beheld the ogres in the air. (13)

तावापतन्ती सहसा दृष्टा राजीवलोचनः ।

लक्ष्मणं लविभ्रमप्येक्ष्य रभो वमवमब्रवीत् ॥ 14  ॥

Seeing the two Rākṣasas rushing headlong towards him, the lotus-eyed Rāma for his part gazed at Lakṣmana and spoke the following words to him: (14)

पषय लक्ष्मण दुर्बैतान् राक्षसान् चिश्रिताशान् ।

मानवास्ममाध्यतान्निलेन यथा घनान् ॥ 15  ॥

क्रिय्यामि न संदेहो नोलसे हनुभीदुशान् ।

इत्युक्त्वा वचनं रामश्रापे संधाय वेगवान् ॥ 16  ॥

मानवं परमोदारमवं परमभास्वरम्।

चिश्रिप परमकुब्जो मारीचारसि राघव: ॥ 17  ॥

"Look here, O Lakṣmana, I shall scatter the wicked Rāksasas, that feed on raw flesh, by means of the Mānavāstra, the missile presided over by Swayambhuna Manu, as clouds are dispersed by the wind: there is no doubt about it. I do not feel inclined to kill

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

them as they are destined to survive for some more years." Having made this observation, Šri Rāma, a scion of Raghu, who was full of agility, put to his bow the most excellent and supremely effulgent missile presided over by Manu, and hurled it most angrily at the breast of Mārica. (15-17)

स तेन परमार्थेण मानवेन समाहत:।

सम्पूर्ण योजनशत क्षिस: सागरसम्पलवे ॥ 18  ॥

Forcibly hit with that highly excellent missile presided over by Manu, the ogre was flung in mid ocean, a distance of full one hundred Yojanas (eight hundred miles). (18)

विचेतनं निपूर्णतं शीतेपुबलपीडितम्।

निरस्तं दुर्शय मारोचे रामो लक्ष्मणमब्रबीत् ॥ 19  ॥

पश्य लक्ष्मण शीतेपुं मानवं मनुसहितम्।

मोहयित्वा नयतेनं न च प्राणीर्वियुन्ते ॥ 20  ॥

Seeing Mārica thrown away reeling and struck senseless by the force of Šitēşu, the missile presided over by Manu, Śrī Rāma said to Lakṣmana, “Behold, O Lakṣmana, the power of Šitēşu, the missile presided over and tried by Manu ! It has removed the demon to such a long distance having rendered him senseless; still the fellow has not been deprived of his life. (19-20)

इमानपि वधिष्यामि निर्घुणान् दुरुत्वारिण:।

राक्षसान् यापकर्मेक्षान् यज्ञान्न् कधिराशनान् ॥ 21  ॥

"I shall get rid of the other blood sucking Rāksasas too, who are merciless and wicked, are given to sinful deeds and interfere with the performance of sacrifices." (21)

इत्युक्ला लक्षणं चाशु लाघवं दर्शधिरित्र।

विगृहु सुमहचान्स्वमानेयं रयुनन्दन: ॥ 22  ॥

सुबाहूरसि चिश्वेप स विद्धः प्रापतद् भूति।

शेषान् वायव्यमादाय निजधान महायशा: ।

राघवः परमोदारो मुनीनां मुदमावहन् ॥ 23  ॥

Having spoken to Lakṣmaṇa as aforesaid and showing his agility as it were, Śri Rāma (a scion of Raghu) quickly invoked the most excellent missile presided over by the god of fire and hurled it at the breast of Subāhu and, pierced by it, the latter fell dead on the ground. Invoking the missile presided over by the wind-god, the highly illustrious and extremely large-hearted Śri Rāma (a scion of Raghu) threw away the rest at a distance, bringing joy thereby to all the sages. (22-23)

स हत्वा राक्षसान् सर्वान् यज्ञान् रघुनन्दनः ।

त्रहिधिभः पूर्जितस्तत्र यथेज्ञे विजये पुरा ॥ 24  ॥

Having got rid in this way of all the Raksasas that interfered with the performance of sacrifices, Śri Rāma was honoured in that holy retreat by the Rsis even as Indra was felicitated in the past on his victory scored over demons. (24)

अथ यजे समासे तु विश्वामित्रो महापुनि: ।

निरीतिका दिशो दृष्टा काकुक्स्थमिदमबजीत् ॥ 25  ॥

The sacrificial proceedings having been brought to a close, the great sage Viśwāmitra for his part forthwith spoke to Śri Rāma (a scion of Kakutsha) as follows on seeing the quarters rid of all pests: (25)

कृत्याशौं सम्म महाबाहो कृतं गुरुवचस्वला ।

सिद्धान्रभामिदं सत्यं कृतं वीर महायश: ।

स हि रामं प्रश्रयैवं तान्यां संध्यामुपागमत् ॥ 26  ॥

"I stand accomplished of my purpose, O mighty-armed and highly illustrious hero, in that the bidding of your preceptor (in me) has been carried out by you. Nay, the name of this Siddhāsrama too has been justified." Having applauded Śrī Rāma as aforesaid, he offered prayers to the evening twilight alongwith the two brothers. (26)

इत्यापौ श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंये आदिकाव्ये बालकारण्डे त्रिशः सर्ग: ॥ 30  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.



एकत्रिंश: सर्गें:

Canto XXXI

Accompanied by Śri Rāma, Laksmaṇa and a host of Rsis, Sage

Víśwāmitra proceeds northward in the direction of Mithilā to

witness the bow-sacrifice of King Janaka and breaks his

journey on the bank of the Sona at sunset

अथ तां रजनीं तत्र कृताधौं रामलक्ष्मणीं।

क्रवतुर्प्रिदती वीरी प्रह्छे नान्तरात्मना ॥ 1  ॥

Delighted on having accomplished their purpose in the shape of protecting the sacrifice of Viśwāmitra, the two heroes, Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, then spent that night with a most cheerful mind in the sacrificial hall of Viśwāmitra at Siddhāsrama itself. (1)

प्रभातायां तु शर्पेयं कृतपौर्वाहिकक्रिया ।

विश्वरामिरमूर्षीश्रान्यान् सहिताविभजमन्तु: ॥ 2  ॥

Having finished their morning duties at the close of night, the two brothers for their part sought together Viśwāmitra and the other Rsis. (2)

अभिवाद्य मुनिश्रेष्ठे ज्वलन्तमिव पावकम्।

उक्तु: परमोदारं वाक्यं मधुरभाषिणी ॥ 3  ॥

Greeting Viśwāmitra, the foremost of sages, who shone as a blazing fire, the two sweet-tongued brothers made the following highly noble submission: (3)

इमौ सम मुनिशादूलं किंकरी समुपागतौ।

आजापय मुनिश्छेत शासनं करवाव किम् ॥ 4  ॥

"Here are we, your servants, present before you, O tiger among hermits ! Tell us, O jewel among sages, what injunction of yours we should carry out." (4)

एवमुक्ते तयोर्वांवे सर्व एव महर्षयः।

विश्वाभिरं पुरस्कृत्य रामं वचनमब्रुवन् ॥ 5  ॥

At the aforesaid submission of the two brothers all the great Rsis present there made the following reply to Śrī Rāma with the permission of Viśwāmitra : (5)

भैथिलस्य नरप्रेष्ठ जनकस्य भविष्यति ।

यज: परमधर्मिट्रस्तत्र यास्यामहे वयम् ॥ 6  ॥

"A most pious sacrifice is going to be performed, O jewel among men, by Janaka, the king of Mithilā. We shall repair to that place. (6)

त्वं चैव नरशादूलं सहासामधिपिभिययसि।

अब्जुतं च धनूलं तत्र तं रड्यमहैसि ॥ 7  ॥

"You too must accompany us, O tiger among men! Nay, there you ought to see a marvellous jewel among bows. (7)

तब्धि पूर्व नरश्रेष्ठ दर्नं सदसि दैवहैः।

अप्रमेयवलं घोरं मघे परमभावसरम् ॥ 8  ॥

"The bow, which is so terrible and supremely effulgent and whose strength (weight) cannot be estimated, was actually presented in the former times, O jewel among men, to a former king of Mithilā, Devarāta by name, in a sacrificial assembly by the gods, who had got it in their turn from Lord Śiva. (8)

नास्य देवा न नाथवाँ नासुरा न च राक्षसा:।

कर्तूमारोपणं शक्ता न कधंचन मानुषा: ॥ 9  ॥

"Neither gods nor Gandharvas nor demons nor ogres are able to bend it, much less human beings. (9)

धनुषस्तस्य वीर्यं हिं जिज्ञासन्तो महीक्षितः ।

न शैकुरारोपयितुं राजपुरा महाजलाः ॥ 10  ॥

"Eager to gauge its strength even very mighty kings and princes failed to bend it. (10)

तद्धनुर्नरशादूलं मैधित्यलय महात्मनः ।

तत्र उद्यसयि काकुतस्थ यजं च परमाढुतम् ॥ 11  ॥

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

"There, O Rāma (a scion of Kakutstha), you will be able to see that bow of the high-souled king of Mithilā as well as his most wonderful sacrifice, O tiger among men! (11)

तद्धि यजफलं तेन मैथिलेनोतमं धनु:।

याचितं नरशादूलं सुनाभं सर्वदैवते:॥ 12  ॥

“That excellent bow, well-formed at the centre where it is held by the fist, was indeed solicited by the aforesaid king of Mithila as a reward for the sacrifice and gifted as such by all gods.* (12)

आयाभभूतं नृपतेलस्य वेधमनि राजच। अर्धितं विविधेर्गीध्धीप्रेश्रागुरुगाथधिभ: ॥ 13  ॥

"Worshipped with sandal-pastes of various kinds and incenses emitting the smell of aloe-wood, it stands enshrined in the palace of that king as an object of worship, O scion of Raghu!" (13)

एवमुक्चा मुनिवर: प्रस्थानमकारेत् तदा।

सर्विसंय: सकाकुत्थ आमान्य वनदेवता: ॥ 14  ॥

Saying so (through the other sages), Viśwāmitra, the foremost of sages, presently set out on the journey accompanied by a host of Rāsis as well as by Śri Rāma and Laksmana, the two scions of Kakutstha, taking leave of the sylvan deities in the following words: (14)

स्वस्ति वोस्तु गामिथामि सिद्धः सिद्धाभ्यादहम्।

उत्तरे नाहवीतीर हिमवनं शिलोच्चयम् ॥ 15  ॥

"May good betide you all! Accomplished of purpose I shall proceed from Siddhāsrama to the Himalaya mountain on the northern bank of the holy Gaṅgā." (15)

इत्युक्वा मुनिशाईलः कोशिकः स तपोधनः ।

उत्तरां विशमहिष्य प्रस्थानुमपचक्रमे ॥ 16  ॥

Having observed thus, the celebrated sage Viswámitra, a scion of Kuśa, a

tiger among hermits and rich in askesis, made ready to depart in a northerly direction.

(16)

तं जजन्तं मुनिवरम्बगादनुसारिणाम्।

शकटीशतमातं तु प्रयाणे ब्रहवादिन्दाम्। 11 9  ॥

No less than a hundred carts, full of load consisting mostly of requisites of a sacrifice, belonging to his followers, who were all exponents of the Vedas, accompanied Viswāmitra, the foremost of sages, as he proceeded on his journey.

(17)

मृगपक्षिणाणश्चैव सिद्धान्ध्रमनिवासिन:।

अनुजगमूर्महात्मानं विश्वामित्र तपोधनम् ॥ 16  ॥

Even herds of beasts and flocks of birds dwelling in the Siddhāsrama followed the high-souled Viswāmitra, whose only wealth was his asceticism. (18)

निवर्तयामास ततः सर्विसंधः स पक्षिणः ।

ते गत्वा दूरमध्यानं लव्यमाने दिवाकारे ॥ 19  ॥

वासं चकुभुंगिनणा: शोणाकृते समाहिताः ।

तेउस्तं गते दिनकारे स्नावा हुतहुताशना: ॥ 20  ॥

विश्वात्मिकां पुरस्कृत्य निषिद्यमितीजसः ।

गामोउपि सहसौमित्रियर्नीसतानभिपूज्य च ॥ 21  ॥

अग्रातो निष्यसात्थ विश्वामिनस्य धीमतः ।

अथ रामो महातेजा विश्वामित्रा तपोधनम् ॥ 22  ॥

पप्रच्छ मृनिशादुर्लं कोतृहलसमान्वितम् ।

भगवन् कों नव्य देश: समुद्वनशोभितः ॥ 23  ॥

श्रोतृमिच्छामि भई ते वक्तुमहिंस तत्त्वतः ।

नोदितो रामावक्येन कथयामास सुफ्रतः ।

तस्य देशस्य निश्चिलमृषियध्ये महातपाः ॥ 24  ॥

Thereupon Viśwāmitra, accompanied by the host of seers, persuaded the birds as well as the beasts to return. Having covered a long distance, the hosts of hermits, accompanying Viśwāmitra, concentrated and the sun now declining, broke their journey on the bank of the Sona. Having bathed in the river and having worshipped the sacred

* Elsewhere it is stated that the bow was vouchsafed to a king of Mithilā by Lord Śiva Himself. The Padma-Purāna, for instance, says : 'चार्य रणभोर्दयतन्'. In the Kūrma-Purāna too we read :

प्रतिश्रष भगवानीरास्रणी नीलालोहितः । प्रदरी शत्रुगाराणां जनकायाद्धुं धनुः ।

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

fire when the sun had set, the sages, who were all possessed of immense glory, sat down placing Viśwamitra at their head. Paying their homage to the aforesaid sages and greeting them all, Śri Rāma too, accompanied by Lakṣmana, presently sat down facing the wise Viśwāmitra. Now Śri Rāma, who was possessed of exceptional glory, asked Viśwāmitra, a tiger among sages, whose only wealth was his

asceticism, with great curiosity as follows: "What land could this possibly be, graced with a thriving forest, O venerable Sir? I wish to hear of it. Be pleased to tell me accurately about it. God bless you!" Prompted by the aforesaid question of Śri Rāma, the great ascetic, Viśwāmitra, of noble vows proceeded to speak elaborately about that land in the midst of the seers accompanying him. (19-24)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे एकरिंश: सर्प: ॥ 31  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-one in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

द्वारिशः सर्गः

Canto XXXII

An account of the four sons of Kuśa; the hundred daughters of Kuśanābha turn hunch-backed under a curse of the wind-god

ब्रह्म्योनिर्महानासीत् कुशो नाम महातपा:।

अविल्यज्ञतधर्मज: सजनप्रतिपूजक: ॥ 1  ॥

There was a noble and great ascetic-king of unobstructed vows, Kuśa by name, born of Brahmā, who knew what is right and honoured righteous men. (1)

स महात्मा कुलीनायां युक्तायां सुमहाबलान्।

वैद्य्याँ जनयामास चतुः: सदुर्शान् सुतान् ॥ 2  ॥

कुशणाबं कुशनाथं च असुत्तैरजसं वसुम्।

दौरिसयुक्तान् महोल्साहान् क्षत्रधर्मचिकारीयर ॥ 3  ॥

तानुवाच कुश: पुत्रान् धर्मध्छन् सत्यवादिनः ।

क्रियतां पालनं पुत्रा धर्म प्राप्यथ धुकलम् ॥ 4  ॥

Through his high-born and worthy wife, who hailed from Vidarbha, that exalted soul begot four exceptionally mighty sons

becoming of himself, Kuśamba, Kuśanabha, Asūrtarajasas* and Vasu, who were not only brilliant and possessed of great zeal but were also extremely pious and veracious. With intent to urge them to their duty of protecting people, appropriate to a Kṣatriya, Kuśa said to them, “The duty of protecting people must be done by you. Thereby you will earn unbounded merit.” (2-4)

कृशस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा चत्वारो लोकसत्तमाः।

निवेशं चक्रिकरे सर्वे पुराणां नृवरास्तदा ॥ 5  ॥

Hearing the admonition of Kuśa all those four jewels among men, who were the noblest in the world, forthwith laid the foundation of four cities. (5)

कुशाम्बस्तु महातेजा: कौशाम्बीमकरोत् पुरीम्।

कुशनाभस्तु धर्माता पुरं चक्रे महादेवम् ॥ 6  ॥

* The author of the famous commentary entitled the “Rāmāyaṇa-Śiromani” has accepted the variant “Amūrtirajasa.” In the Mahābhārata (Vana., LXLV. 17) we come across the name Amūrtarayā and the character bearing this name is stated there to have founded the city of Dharmāranya, which was encompassed by a sacred forest of the same name. This represents the tract lying round Gayā. The city of Gayā was built by a king named Gaya, who has been referred to as a son of Amūrtarayā. This establishes the identity of Gaya with Dharmāranya. In the Mahābhārata (Vana., LXXXIV.85) the lake Brahmasaravora forming part of the township of Gayā has been declared as surrounded by the forest of Dharmāranya. In Vana., LXXXII. 47 worship of the manes has been commended at Dharmāranya.

*VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

Kuśāmba, who was possessed of exceptional glory, for his part founded the city of Kauśāmbi (named after himself); while Kuśanābha, whose mind was given to piety, built the city named Mahodaya, the modern Kannauja. (6)

असूत्रीजसो नाम धार्मिरणं महामति:।

चक्रे पुरवरं राजा वसुनामा गिरिजबन्म।। 7 ।।

Asūrtarajasa built a city, Dharmāranya by name; while the prince named Vasu built Girivraja, the modern Rajgir, the foremost of all cities. (7)

एषा वसुमती नाम वसोस्तस्य महात्मनः ।

एते शैलवरा: पढ़ प्रकाशने समन्ततः ॥ 8 ॥

This capital of that high-souled prince, Vasu, was also designated after him as Vasumati. These five great hills* cast their splendour all round the city of Girivraja, justifying the appellation given to it. (8)

सुमागधी नदी रम्या मगधान् विश्रुतासप्रयो।

पञ्जानां शैलमुख्यानां मध्ये मालेव शोभते ॥ 9  ॥

The beautiful and celebrated river Sona, which spreads its charm like a garland in the midst of these five prominent hills flows from the west into the territory of Magadha and is accordingly known as the holy Mågadhi. (9)

सैषा हि मागधी राम वसोस्तस्य महात्मन: । पूर्वर्धिध्वरिता राम सुळेत्रा सस्यामालिति ॥ 10  ॥

This celebrated river Mågadhi, O Rāma, which flows in an easterly direction and is lined with charming fields on both sides and is thus adorned with rows of crops, is connected with the same high-souled Vasu, O Rāma! (10)

कुशनाभस्तु राजर्धि: कन्याशतमनुतमम्।

जनयामास धर्मात्मा घृताच्छा रघुनन्दन ॥ 11  ॥

The royal sage Kuśanābha, for his part, whose mind was given to righteousness,

O scion of Raghu, begot a hundred daughters, excelled by none, through an Apsarā or celestial nymph named Ghrṭaci. (11)

तात्सु यौवनशालियो रूपवल्य: स्वलंकृताः।

उडानभूमिमागाय प्रावूषीव शतहुदा: ॥ 1 1  ॥

गायत्प्यो नृत्म्यनाश्र वादयन्त्यन्तु राषव।

आमोंद परमं जमुर्बंरभरणभूषिता: ॥ 1 3  ॥

With their comeliness enhanced on their attaining maturity, they for their part would repair to the grounds of the royal garden duly adorned with sandal-paste and flowers etc., and decked with excellent jewels and shining like flashes of lighting during the monsoon, and they experienced supreme delight while singing, dancing and playing on their lutes, O scion of Raghu ! (12-13)

अथ ताङ्शसर्वाँज्ञो रूपेणाप्रातिम भुवि।

उद्यानभूमिमागम तारा इव घनान्तरे ॥ 14  ॥

Lovely of every limb and peerless on earth in comeliness of form they shone like stars in the midst of clouds on reaching the garden grounds. (14)

ताः सर्वा गुणसम्पत्रा रूपयीवनसंयुतः ।

दूध्रा सर्वात्मको वायुरिदं वचनमब्रवीत् ॥ 15  ॥

Seeing them all endowed with excellences and rich in beauty and youth, one day the wind-god, who is bodily present everywhere, addressed the following words to them: (15)

अहं वः कामये सर्वा भार्यां मम भविष्यथ।

मानुषस्यन्तां भावो दीर्भमायुरावम्यथ ॥ 16  ॥

"I wish to have you all as my own. You should, therefore, be my wedded wives. The thought that you are human beings should be given up. In this way you will attain a long lease of life. (16)

चलं हि यौवनं नित्यं मानुषेषु विशेषतः ।

अक्षयं यौवनं प्रासा अस्पर्धि भविष्यथ ॥ 17  ॥

* In the Mahābhārata (Sabhā., XXI.2) these five hills have been named as Vipula, Varāha, Vṛṣabha (Rṣabha), Rṣigiri (Mātaṅga) and Caityaka.

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

"Indeed youth is ever fleeting, especially in human beings. If you accept me as your husband, you will attain undecaying (abiding) youth and will become immortal." (17)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा वायोरिक्लष्टकर्मण:।

अपहास्य ततो वाक्यं कन्याशतमधाव्बवीत् ॥ 18  ॥

अन्तश्रसि भूतातां सर्वैंगं सुसस्तम।

प्रभावज्ञा ते सर्वा: किमर्थयवमव्यसे ॥ 91  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid proposal of the celebrated wind-god, whose movements are ever unobstructed, and then deriding his offer, all the hundred damsels presently said, "In the form of life-breath you move inside all living beings, O jewel among gods! And we are aware of your glory, yet we cherish no attraction for you. Why then do you insult us by making an unseemly offer to us? (18-19)

कुशनाभसुता देव समसता: सुरसतम।

स्थानाच्छ्यावयितुं देयं रक्षामस्तु तपो वयम् ॥ 20  ॥

"We are all daughters of Kuśanābha, O god, the foremost of all gods! We can bring you down from your exalted position by pronouncing a curse on you, yet, even though you are a god, we are anxious to preserve our ascetic glory (which is sure to diminish in the event of our cursing you). (20)

मा भृत् स काळो दुर्भिधः पितरं सत्यवादिन्।

अवमय स्वधेपि स्वयं वरमुपासहे ॥ 21  ॥

"Let not that unpropitious hour ever turn up, O evil-minded one, when prompted by lust (our baser nature) we should crave for and accept a match on our own initiative disregarding our veracious father. (21)

पिता हि प्रभुरस्माकं दैवतं परमं च स:।

यस्य नो दास्यति पिता स नो भतां भविष्यति ॥ 22  ॥

"For father is our master; nay, he is our supreme deity. He alone will be our husband to whom our father will give us away." (22)

तासां तु वचनं श्रुवा हरि: परमकोपनः ।

प्रविश्य सर्वनायाणि बभूज भगवान् प्रभुः ॥ 23  ॥

Hearing their insolent and defiant reply, however, the all-pervading wind-god, who is not only glorious and powerful but exceedingly irascible also, entered all their limbs and distorted them. (23)

ता: कन्या वायुना भगना विविशृनृपतेगृहम्।

प्रविश्य च सुस्पधानता: सलज्ञा: सास्लोचना: ॥ 24  ॥

Distorted by the wind-god, the aforesaid maidens returned to the king's (their father's) palace. Having entered it, they felt much perturbed and abashed and their eyes were filled with tears. (24)

स च ता दयिता भनना: कन्या: परमशोधभना: ।

दूधा दीनास्तदा राजा सम्पान्त इदमवर्जित् ॥ 25  ॥

Perplexed to see those beloved and most charming girls deformed and miserable at that moment, the king (Kuśanābha) asked the following question: (25)

किमिदं कल्यतां पुच्यः कों धर्ममेवम्यन्ते ।

कुक्जा: केन कुतः सर्वीश्रेष्टल्पो नाधिभाषाय ।

एवं राजा विनिःश्य समाधिं संदधे ततः ॥ 26  ॥

“What is this strange phenomenon? The whole thing may be related to me; who has violated the principles of justice? By whom have you all been turned hunchbacks and how is it that you are all making gestures and do not utter a word?” Making the aforesaid inquiry and heaving a deep sigh, the king then composed himself in order to hear their reply. (26)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्याकीये आदिकाज्ये वालकागडे ब्राजिंस: सर्ग: ॥ 32  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-two in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.



རྟོལ་རྩོན་: ནགོ:

Canto XXXIII

Kusānābha applauds the forbearance and forgiveness of his daughters; the story of the birth of Brahmadatta and his marriage with Kusānābha's daughters

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुता कुशनाभस्य धीमतः।

शिरोभिश्रणों स्पूढ़ा कन्याशतमभावत ॥ 1  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid question of the celebrated and wise Kusānābha, all the hundred maidens touched his feet with their heads and replied as follows: (1)

वायु: सर्वात्मको राजन् प्रधर्षितुमिच्छति।

अर्शभं मार्गमास्थाय न धर्म प्रत्यवेक्षते ॥ 2  ॥

"Resorting to the evil path, the all-pervading wind-god, Your Majesty, sought to violate us and did not respect our righteous conduct. (2)

पितृमत्वः स्म धर्मे ते स्वच्छन्दे न वयं स्थिताः ।

पितरं नो वुर्णीष्व लं यदि नो दास्यसे तव ॥ 3  ॥

तेन पायानुबन्थेन वचनं न प्रतीच्छता ।

एवं बृबल्यः सर्वा: स्म वायुगाधिष्ठता भुगम् ॥ 4  ॥

"We said to him, 'May good betide you, we are dependent on our father and as such are not masters of our own will. Ask you us of our father; we shall certainly accept you as our husband if he gives us away to you.' Pleading thus we were hit hard (deformed) by him of wicked intent, who did not heed our remonstrance." (3-4)

तासां तु वचनं श्रृता राजा परमधामिकः ।

प्रत्युवाच महातेजा: कन्याशतमनुतम् ॥ 5  ॥

श्रान्तं क्षमावतां पुःयः कतनंयं सुमहत् कृतम्।

ऐकमतस्पूभागय कुलं चावक्षितं मम ॥ 6  ॥

"The act of forbearance done by you, which can be done only by those given to forgiveness, my daughters, was extremely noble on your part. And the fact that the honour of my race was vindicated by you by resorting to unanimity on this point was also a unique achievement on your part. (5-6)

अलंकारे हि नारीणां क्षमा तु पुरुषस्य वा ।

दुरुकरं तच्च वै क्षान्त निवडगेषु विशेषतः ॥ 9  ॥

यादूगी वः क्षमा पुरूः सर्वासामविशेषतः ।

क्षमा दानं क्षमा सत्यं क्षमा यज्ञा प्रयुक्रतः ॥ 8  ॥

“For forbearance is the ornament indeed of womankind as well as of man. And such forbearance particularly with reference to gods as exists in you all without distinction, O my daughters, is difficult to practise. Forbearance is really charity, forbearance is devotion to truth, and forbearance constitutes all sacrifices, my beloved daughters! (7-8)

क्षमा यशः क्षमा धर्मः क्षमायां विधित्तं जगत्।

विसूच्य कन्या: काकुलक्ष यजा निदशविकमः ॥ 9  ॥

मन्ज्ञो मन्वयामास प्रदानं सह मन्थिनः ।

देशे काले च कतन्वं सदूगे प्रतिपादनम् ॥ 1 0  ॥

( Hearing their complaint, the king, for his part, who was exceedingly pious and exceptionally glorious, replied as follows to his hundred daughters, excelled by none :) "Forbearance is fame, forbearance is piety; nay, the entire creation is established in forbearance, crystallized in the form of the earth."

Having sent away the girls to the gynaecum, O scion of Kakutstha, the king (Kusánabha), who possessed the prowess of gods and was adept in deliberation, discussed the question of their marriage with his counsellors since it was necessary to give them away to a worthy man at the proper place and time. (9-10)

तत्स्मेव काले तु चूली नाम महाप्रति:।

क्रव्यैता: शुभाचारो ब्राह्म तप उपागमन्ते। 11 ।।

At this very time a Brahmacāri

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

(lit., one who has turned the flow of his generative fluid upwards and never allowed it to escape), Cūli by name, who was exceptionally glorious and given to virtuous conduct, actually embarked upon a course of austerities* (in the form of meditation) directed towards the realization of Brahma. (11)

तपस्नमुपिं तत्र गन्थवीं पयुंपासते।

सोमदा नाम भई ते कर्मिलतानया तदा ॥ 12  ॥

At that very place, during the period of his askesis, may good betide you, a Gandharva girl, Somadā by name, daughter of Urmilā, waited upon the Rsi in the hope of securing his goodwill, while he was busy practising his austerities. (12)

सा च तं प्रणता भूत्वा शुश्रूषणपरायणा।

उवास काले धार्मिष्य तस्यास्तुते५भवद् युगः ॥ 13  ॥

Bending low before him and devoted to his service, that most pious girl waited upon him at the right time whenever her presence was needed by him. The venerable sage got pleased with her. (13)

स च तां कालयोगेन प्रोवाच रघुनन्दन।

परितृष्टोरसि भयं ते किं करोमि तव प्रियम् ॥ 14  ॥

And when the propitious hour came, the sage, O scion of Raghu, said to the girl, 'I am highly pleased with your innocent services, may all be well with you! What service can I do to you?' (14)

परितृष्टं मृनि ज्ञाला ग्रस्त्वीं मधुरस्वरम्।

उवाच परमप्रीता वाक्यज्ञा वाक्यक्रोविदम् ॥ 15  ॥

Supremely delighted to know the sage much gratified, the eloquent Gandharva girl spoke as follows in a sweet voice to the seer, who was a master of speech: (15)

लक्ष्म्या समुदितो ब्राह्मा ब्रह्मृत्तो महातप: । ब्राह्मृत्ता तपसा युक्ते पुरमिच्छामि थार्मिकम् ॥ 16  ॥

"A great ascetic illumined with Brahmic (spiritual) splendour, you have become one with the Infinite. Hence I seek from you a pious son, rich in askesis (in the form of meditation) directed towards the realization of Brahma, the Absolute. (16)

अपतिश्रासि मई ते भावां चास्मि न कस्यचित् ।

ब्राहोपपतायाश्र दतुर्भहिंस मे सुतम् ॥ 17  ॥

"As for myself, I am unmarried nor shall I be the wife of any. Therefore, let your grace descend on me. Be pleased to grant me a son by dint of your Brahmic (spiritual) glory, since I have sought refuge in you." (17)

तस्याः प्रसजो ब्रहामिन्दुतम् मा

ब्रहादत इति ख्यातं मानसं चूलिन: सुतम् ॥ 18  ॥

Full of delight, the Brāhmaṇa sage Cūlina (a variant of Cūli) conferred on her a mind-born son, rich in askesis (in the form of meditation) directed towards the realization of Brahma, excelled by none and known by the name of ‘Brahmadatta’. (18)

स राजा ब्रह्मदानस्तु पुरीमध्यवस्तु तदा।

कामियल्पं परया लक्ष्यया देवराजो यथा दिवम् ॥ 11  ॥

Invested with supreme (royal) splendour, the said Brahmadatta for his part lived at that time as king in the city of Kámpilyā (built by Kampila) as Indra (the ruler of gods) does in paradise. (19)

स बुद्धिं कृतवान् राजा कुशनाभः सुधार्थिमकः।

ब्रहदत्ताय काकुरस्थ दातुं कन्याशतं तदा ॥ 20  ॥

The aforesaid Kuśanābha, a most pious king, at that time made up his mind, O scion of Kakuttha, to give away all his hundred daughters to Brahmadatta. (20)

तमाहुय महातेज ब्रहादतं महीपति:।

ददौ कन्याशतं राजा सुप्रीतेनातरात्मना ॥ 21  ॥

Calling the said Brahmadatta, the

* There is a Smṛti text which runs as under :

मनसश्रैद्रियाणां च हैकायं परमं तप:।

"One-pointedness of the mind and the senses constitutes the highest form of askesis."

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

exceptionally glorious king (Kusánabha), the ruler of the earth, gave away with a most cheerful mind all the hundred girls to him.

(21)

यथाक्रमं तदा पाणिं जग्राह रघुनन्दन।

ब्रह्मदतो महीपालस्तासां देवपतिर्वथाशा ॥ 22  ॥

At the time of marriage, O scion of Raghu, King Brahmadatta, who shone like Indra (the ruler of gods), married them one after another by taking their hands in his in order of seniority. (22)

स्पष्ट्यत्रे तदा पाणो विकुकजा विगतन्यतः।

युक्ते परस्या लक्ष्य्या बधौ कन्याशतं तदा ॥ 23  ॥

The moment their hands were touched by Brahmaddatta in the course of the wedding, the girls got cured of their deformity and were rid of their agony. Invested with supreme splendour all the hundred girls shone brightly at that time. (23)

स दूधा वायुना मुक्ता: कुशनाभो महीपति: ।

बभूव परमप्रीतो हर्ष लेभे पुन: पुन: ॥ 24  ॥

King Kusanābha was highly pleased to see them freed from morbid affection of the windy humour in their body and experienced joy again and again. (24)

कृतोद्राई तु राजानं ब्रह्मदन्तं महीपतिम्।

सदारं प्रेषयामास सोपाध्यायगणं तद्धा ॥ 25  ॥

King Kusanābha then sent away King Brahmadatta, the delighter of his subjects, alongwith his wedded wives and the host of his family-priests, as soon as he was actually married. (25)

सोमदापि सुतं द्वृषा पुरस्य सदूर्गों क्रियम्।

यथान्यायं च गन्थवोंं स्नुपालतः प्रयन्तन्त।

स्युष्य स्युष्य च ता: कन्या: कुशनाभं प्रशस्य च ॥ 26  ॥

Seeing the union of her son worthy of her, Somadā, the Gandharva damsel, too joyfully greeted her son as well as her aforesaid daughters-in-law, one after another, in order of seniority and, embracing the said brides again and again and applauding Kuśanābha for his hospitality and rich dowry, she departed from there. (26)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाराटे जयार्थिशः सर्ग: ॥ 33  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-three in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Válmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

चतुर्विसंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXXIV

Kuśanābha performs a sacrifice for the birth of a son and is blessed with one, Gādhi by name; the glory of the river Kauśiki (the modern Kosi in Bihar)

कृतोद्राले गते तस्मिन् ब्रह्मते च राषव।

अपूत्र: पुत्रलाभाय पौरिभिप्टिमकल्पयत् ॥ 1  ॥

The aforesaid Brahmaddatta having left after being married, O scion of Raghu, Kuśanābha, who had no male issue, embarked upon a sacrifice intended to procure a son with the object of securing a male issue. (1)

इच्छांतु तु वर्तमानायां कुशनाभं महीपतिम्।

उवाच परमोदारः कुशो ब्रह्मसुतस्तदा ॥ 2  ॥

In the meantime, while the sacrifice was actually going on, the highly magnanimous Kuśa, the father of Kuśanābha and son of Brahmā (the creator) prophesied to King Kuśanābha as follows: (2)



पुत्रने सदुर्ग: पुत्र भविष्यति सुधार्मिकः।

गार्थ प्राप्यसि तेन त्वं कौर्ति लोके च शाखतीम् ॥ 3  ॥

“A most pious son, worthy of you, will be born to you, my son! You will have Gadhi for your son and thereby attain undying glory in the world.” (3)

एवमुक्णा कुशो राम कुशनाभं महीपातिम्।

जगामाकाशमाविश्य ब्रहालोकं सनातनम् ॥ 4  ॥

“Informing King Kuśanābha accordingly, O Rāma, Kuśa withdrew to the immortal Satyaloka (the realm of Brahmā, from which he had obviously come), coursing through the airspace. (4)

कस्यचित् तव्य कालस्य कुशनाभस्य धीमतः ।

जजे परमधर्मिचो गाधिरत्येव नामतः ॥ 5  ॥

"After sometime indeed a most pious son, Gādhi by name, the very name given by Kuśa, was born to the wise Kuśanābha. (5)

स पिता मम काकुत्स्थ गाधि: परमधार्मिकः ।

कुशवंशप्रसूतोरम कीशिको सूचनद्त ॥ 6  ॥

"Thet exceedingly pious man, Gādhi by name, was my father, O descendant of Kakutstha! And descended in the line of Kuśa, I am known as Kauśika, O scion of Raghu! (6)

पूर्वज भारिनी चापि मम राषव सूद्रताना

नान्मा सत्यवती नाम ऋचीके प्रतिपादिता ॥ 7  ॥

"I had an elder sister too, of noble vows, known by the name of Satyavati and given away to the sage, Rcika. (7)

सशरीरा गता स्वर्गं भर्तीमनुवर्तिनी।

कोशिकी परमोदारा प्रवृत्ता च महान्दो ॥ 8  ॥

दिव्या पुण्योदका रन्या हिमवन्तमुपाश्रिता।

लोकस्य हितकार्यार्थ विज्ञान भार्यी मम ॥ 9  ॥

"Following as she did, the wishes of her husband throughout her life, my sister bodily ascended to heaven and later on turned into a most beneficent and delightful great river—Kausikī (the modern Kosi), flowing by the side of the Himalayas, unearthly in

character, whose waters confer merit on those using it—and is thus engaged in doing good to the world. (8-9)

ततोर्द हिमवत्यार्थे वसामि नियतः सुखम्।

भयित्यां स्नेहसंयुक्तः क्रीशिक्यां सृष्टनन्दि ॥ 10  ॥

“Full of affection for my sister, I had been happily leading a life of self-discipline since then by the side of the Himalayas on the banks of the Kauśiki, O scion of Raghu! (10)

सा तु सत्यवती पुण्या सत्ये धर्मे प्रतिधितता ।

पतित्रता महाभागा कौशिकी सरितां वरा ॥ 11  ॥

“That pious and highly blessed lady, Satyavati, who was established in the virtue of truthfulness and exclusively devoted to her husband, is still extant in the form of Kauśiki, the foremost of rivers. (11)

उहं हि नियमादूर नाम हित्वा तां सम्युपागतः ।

सिद्धाश्रमनुपागः सिद्धोत्रिम तव तेजसा ॥ 12  ॥

"Leaving that river I came down to the plains because of my vow to perform a sacrifice at some consecrated spot and arrived at Siddhāsrama, where I got accomplished of my purpose by dint of your glory (might). (12)

एषा राम ममोलपत्ति: स्वस्य वंशस्य कर्पिति।

देशश्यल हि महावाहो नयां तं परिपुरच्छसि ॥ 3  ॥

"In this way has been told by me my birth from the loins of Gādhi, the genesis of my race (from Kuśa, son of Brahmā) and the history of the land of Girivraja extending along the bank of the Sona, which you asked me in particular, O mighty-armed Rāma! (13)

गतोर्धरात्र: काकुत्थ कथाः कथयतो मम।

निद्रामध्येहि भई ते मा भूद्व विज्ञोर्ध्वनीह नः ॥ 14  ॥

“Half of the night has passed in my narrating past episodes, O scion of Kakutstha ! Peace be with you ! Now go to sleep. Let there be no interference in this journey of ours due to torpor caused by sleeplessness. (14)

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

निष्पद्धास्तरवः सर्वे निलीना मृगपक्षिण: । नैशेन तमसा व्यासा दिशश्र उरघुनन्दन ॥ 15  ॥

"All the trees are motionless, the beasts and birds are buried in sleep and the quarters stand enveloped in the darkness of night, O scion of Raghu! (15)

शनैर्विसृघने संध्या नभा नेत्रैरिवातूनम्।

नक्षत्रतारागहनं ज्योतिभिरवधासते ॥ 16  ॥

"The evening twilight has gradually receded and the firmament, thick set with lunar mansions and other stars, is shining with the heavenly bodies as though covered with innumerable eyes. (16)

उत्तिष्ठे च श्रीतांशु: शशी लोकतमोनुः ।

हादयन् प्राणिनां लोके मनांसि प्रभया स्वया ॥ 17  ॥

"The moon, which dispels the darkness of the world at night, is just rising*, diffusing its cool rays and delighting the minds of all living beings in the world by its soothing and refreshing splendour. (17)

नैशानि सर्वभृतानि प्रचरन्ति ततस्ततः ।

यक्षरास्यससंघाश्र रौराश्र चिशिताशना: ॥ 18  ॥

"All nocturnal beings, viz., fearful hosts of Yakṣas and Rākṣasas as well as fiends (feeding on raw flesh) are freely roaming here and there." (18)

एवमुक्ता महातैना विरारम महापुनि:।

साधु साध्विति ते सवै मुनयो हृष्यपूजनम् ॥ 19  ॥

Saying so, the exceptionally glorious and great sage Viswāmitra, became silent

and all the aforesaid sages, who accompanied him, applauded him saying "Well spoken! Good !! (19)

कृषिकानामयं वंशो महान् धर्मपर: सदा।

ब्रहीपेमा महात्मान: कुशवैश्या नरोतमा: ॥ 20  ॥

“Great is this race of Kuśa and ever given to righteousness too. The high-souled kings descended in the line of Kuśa have been as good as Brāhmaṇa Rṣis. (20)

विशेषेण भवानेव विश्वामित्र महायशः।

कोशिको सरितां श्रेष्ठा कुलोह्योतकरी तव ॥ 21  ॥

“You, O highly illustrious Viśwāmitra, who have attained Brahmanhood by dint of your austerities, are particularly so. And Kauśiki, the foremost of rivers, has added to the lustre of your race.” (21)

मुर्दितैर्मुनिशादूर्णे: प्रशस्तः कुशिकात्मनः ।

निद्रामुपगामव्छ्रीमानस्तंतत इवांशुमान् ॥ 22  ॥

Extolled thus by the foremost of sages, who were full of delight, the glorious Viśwāmitra, the son of Gādhi, a scion of Kuśa, fell asleep even as the sun sinks below the horizon. (22)

रामोउपि सहसौमित्रि: किंचिद्वगतविसव्य: ।

प्रशस्य मुनिशादूर्ते नित्रां समुपसेवते ॥ 23  ॥

Glorifying Viśwāmitra, a tiger among sages, Śri Rāma too, who felt a bit amazed to hear the family history of Viśwāmitra, courted sleep along with Lakṣmaṇa, son of Sumitrā. (23)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये वाल्काण्डे

चतुर्विंश: सर्प: ॥ 34  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-four in the Balakanda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

[Unreadable]

* From the above description it can be easily inferred that it was the ninth night of a dark fortnight.



पश्रत्रिशः सर्गः

Canto XXXV

Crossing the Sona, Viśwāmitra and party reach the bank of the holy Gaṅgā and spend the night there. Requested by Śri Rāma, he narrates the story of the origin of the Gaṅgā

उपाय स्त्रिशेषं तु श्रोणाकृते महर्दिधिः:।

निशायां सुप्रभातायां विश्वामित्रोःयथभात् ॥ 1  ॥

Having reposed for the rest of the night on the bank of the Sona alongwith the great Rşis, who accompanied him on the journey, Viśwāmitra spoke as follows on the night having culminated in a beautiful sunrise : (1)

सूपप्रभात निशा राम पूर्वा संध्या प्रवर्ते।

उत्नघोतिष्ठ भई ते गमनायाधिरोच्य ॥ 2  ॥

"The night has ended in a lovely dawn, O Rāma! The morning twilight has set in. Get up, arise and make yourself ready to proceed further. May happiness and well-being attend you!" (2)

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य कृतपूर्वोढ़कक्रिक्यः।

गमनं रोचयामास वाक्यं चेदमुवाच् है ॥ 3  ॥

Hearing his instruction as aforesaid and having finished his morning duties (Sandhyā etc.), Śri Rāma made himself ready to leave for the journey and spoke the following words: so the tradition goes: (3)

अयं शोण: शुभजलोगाध: पुलिनमणिडत:।

कतरेण पथा ब्रह्ना् संतरिष्यामहे वयम् ॥ 4  ॥

"The river Sona, whose waters are so holy, is fordable here and as such adorned with sandy banks. By which of the two fords (appearing before us) shall we wade through it, O holy Sir?" (4)

एवमुक्तस्तु रामेण विश्वामित्रोउ्ब्रविद्धम्।

एष पन्था मवोहिष्टो येन याति महर्षयः ॥ 5  ॥

Questioned thus by Śrī Rāma, Viśwāmitra indeed replied as follows: “Here

is the ford already pointed out by me, through which the great Rāsi over there are wading." (5)

एवमुक्ता महर्षयो विश्वामिजेण धीमता।

पश्यन्तसे प्रयाता वै वनानि विविधानि च। 6 ।।

After wise Viswámitra said so, the Maharśis enjoying the beautiful sceneries of the forest departed. (6)

ते गत्वा दूरमध्यानं गते२धंदिवसे तदा।

जाङ्गवीं सरितां श्रेष्ठां ददुर्गुर्मुप्निसेविताम्।। 7 ।।

Then having crossed the Sona at the spot mentioned by Viswámitra and traversed a long way further, the party sighted the Gaṅgā, the foremost of all rivers, resorted to by sages, in the afternoon. (7)

तां दुईा पुण्यसलिलां हंससारससेविताम्।

बभूव्रुर्भन्यः सर्वे मुदिताः सहाराघवा: ॥ 8  ॥

तस्यास्तरीत तदा सर्वे चक्रुवसपरिश्रहम्।

ततः स्नाला यथान्यां संतर्धे पितृद्वेताः ॥ 9  ॥

The sages, including Śri Rāma and Lakṣmana, the two scions of Raghu, were all rejoiced to see the celebrated river, whose waters confer merit (on those who resort to them) and which was frequented by swans and cranes. (8-9)

हुला चैवाभिनहोत्राणि प्रायश चामृतवद्ध्वि: । विविशुर्जाद्वितीर शुभा मुंदितमानसा: ॥ 10  ॥ विश्वामित्र महात्मानं परिवार्यं समन्ततः ।

विचित्ताश्र यथान्यां रावचो च यथाह्रतः ।

सम्प्रह्टमना रामो विश्वामित्रमथाव्रजित् ॥ 11  ॥

On the bank of that river all of them forthwith broke their journey. Having then bathed in the river according to the scriptural ordinance, (i.e., after reciting a Vedic hymn



known as the Aghamarṣana-Śukta—vide Rgveda X. 190), duly propitiated the manes and gods (including Rṣis) with libations of water and also poured oblations into the sacred fire and partaken of the remnants of the sacrifice, which have been likened* to ambrosia in the Śāstras, the blessed Rṣis sat down on the bank of the Gaṅgā with a cheerful mind surrounding the high-souled Viśwāmitra on all sides. When they were all comfortably seated in order of seniority as also Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa (the two scions of Raghu) according to their position, Śri Rāma presently addressed Viśwāmitra as follows with an overjoyed mind: (10-11)

भगवछ्छोतुमिछ्ठामि गज्ञं जिपधानां नदीम्।

त्रैलोकयं कक्षमाकम्य नाता नदनदीपतिम् ॥ 12  ॥

"I wish to hear, O venerable Sir, about the holy river Gaṅgā, which takes a threefold course, flowing as it does through heaven, the earth and the subterranean regions, how having coursed through the three worlds, viz., heaven and earth and the space intervening the two, it meets the ocean (the ruler of rivers, both big and small)." (12)

चोदितो रमावाक्येन विश्वामिको महापुनि: ।।

वृद्धि जन्म च गृज्ञाया वक्तुमेवोपचक्रमे ॥ 13  ॥

Impelled by the inquiry of Śri Rāma, the great sage Viśwāmitra started discoursing on the origin as well as on the expansion of the holy Gaṅgā, as follows: (13)

शैलेजेही द्विमवान् राम धातूनामाकरो महान्।

तस्य कन्याद्ये राम क्लेपणाप्तिमं भूवि ॥ 14  ॥

"There stands (on the extreme north of India) O Rāma, the great Himalaya, the king of mountains and a storehouse of minerals. A couple of daughters, matchless in beauty on earth, were born to the deity presiding over the said mountain, O Rāma! (14)

या मेकटुहिता राम तयोमांता सुमध्यमा।

नाना मेना मनोज्ञा वै पत्नी हिमवत: प्रिया ॥ 15  ॥

"The charming and beloved consort of Himavān, the deity presiding over the Himalayas, Menā by name, who was marked by a slender waist and was the daughter of Mount Meru, was their mother, O Rāma! (15)

तस्यां गड़ेयमभवज्येष्य त्रिमवतः सुता।

उमा नाम द्वितीयाभूत कन्या तस्येव राषव॥ 16  ॥

"The elder daughter of Himavān, born through her, was this Gaṅgā. A second daughter, Umā by name, was born to the selfsame Himavān, O scion of Raghu ! (16)

अथ ज्येषं सुरा: सर्वे देवकार्यचिकारीवा।

शैलेनं वरयामासुरुर्जां विषयानां नदीम् ॥ 17  ॥

"With the intention of accomplishing through her the purpose of gods, all the gods presently asked Himavān, the king of mountains, for the elder of the two, viz., Gaṅgā, who later turned into a river that follows a threefold course. (17)

ददौ धर्मेण हिमवांतनवां लोकपावतीम्।

स्वच्छन्दपक्षगां गझ़ी जैलेक्यहितकाव्यया ॥ 18  ॥

“From considerations of piety (according to which the solicitation of a supplicant is not to be rejected) and out of solicitude for the welfare of the three worlds, Himavān gave in adoption to gods his daughter, Gaṅgā, who is capable of purifying the world and who could carve her way even through the airspace and the subterranean regions according to her own free will. (18)

प्रतिगृह्न प्रतिलोकार्थं प्रतिलोकाहितकाडूर्धिणः। गज्ञामादाय तेजगछन् कृतार्थैनातरात्यना ॥ 91  ॥

"Accepting the gift so readily given by the pious Himavān in the interest of the three worlds and taking the Gaṅgā with them, the gods, who wished well of the

* Vide Bhagavadgūtā : च्रतिश्रामतभुजो याति ब्रह्म सनातनम् (IV. 31)

"Those partaking of ambrosia in the form of the remnants of a sacrifice attain the everlasting Brahma."

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

three worlds, left with their mind fully satisfied.

(19)

या चान्या शैलद्धिता कन्याउसीद रघुनन्दन।

उर्ष सुव्रतमास्थाय तपसेपे तपोधन॥ 20  ॥

"The other daughter of Himavan, who looked upon askesis as Her only wealth, O scion of Raghu, practised austerities in the shape of meditation on Lord Śiva, while remaining a virgin and observing a noble and formidable vow of forgoing even dry leaves to keep Her body and soul together. (20)

उप्रेण तपसा युक्तां ददौ शैलवर: सुताम्।

रूत्रायाम्रितरूपयं उमां लोकनमस्कृतम् ॥ 21  ॥

"Himavān, the chief of mountains, gave away to Lord Rudra (the god of destruction), who has no rival, this daughter, Uma who was rich in severe asceticism and adored by the universe. (21)

एते ते शैलराजस्य सुते लोकनमस्कृते।

गज्ञा च सरितां श्रेष्ठ उमा देवी च राषव।। 22  ॥

"Gangā, the foremost of rivers, and Goddess Uma, these are the two well-

known daughters of Himavān, the king of mountains, who are venerated by the whole universe, O scion of Raghu ! (22)

एतत् ते सर्वमाख्यांतं यथा विषथगामिनी।

खं गता प्रथमं तात गर्िं गतिमतां वर ॥ 23  ॥

सैषा सुर्नदी रम्या शैलेन्द्रतनया तदा ।

सुरलोकं समास्कदा विषपाणा जलवाहिनि ॥ 24  ॥

"In this way everything connected with the origin of Ganga has been narrated to you. Now hear how it followed a threefold course. In the first place (as I have told you in verse 18 above), O dear Rāma, it rose into the sky, which allows moving space to all mobile beings along with the gods who took her away to heaven. Then this celebrated daughter of Himavān, the king of mountains, rose to heaven (the realm of gods) in the form of the delightful Mandākini, the heavenly stream visible in the form of the milky way, and last of all assumed the form of an earthly stream, Ganga, capable of ridding the world of its sins." (23-24)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकांये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे पश्जिश्र: सर्प: ॥ 35  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-five in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

घटिंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXXVI

Gods interrupt the amorous pastimes of Lord Śiva and His Consort, Goddess Uma, on which She curses gods, including Mother Earth

उक्तवाव्ये मुनी तस्मिन्भौ ग्रावलक्ष्मणौ।

प्रतिनन्दा कर्थां वीरावृचतुर्मिनपुगवम्.॥ 1  ॥

The aforesaid sage, Viśwāmitra, having concluded his speech, both the heroes, Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, hailed with joy the story of the two daughters of Himavān, told by him and spoke as follows to Viśwāmitra, the foremost of sages: (1)

धर्म्युकामिदं ब्रह्न् कथितं परमं त्वया।

दृष्टितु: शैलराजस्य न्येष्टाया वकुभद्रसि।

वित्तरं विस्तरज्ञोसि दिव्यमानुप्रसभ्यवम् ॥ 2  ॥

"You have narrated, holy Sir, this most excellent story capable of conferring merit on those who hear it. Be pleased now to give a detailed account of Ganga (the elder daughter of Himavān), relating to her celestial and earthly career, since you know these details. (2)

ग्रीन पथो हेतुना केन पलावयेल्लोकपवानी।

कर्थ गड़ा विश्वशता विस्तृतमा ॥ 3  ॥

* VÅLMÍKI-RÅMÄYANA *

"With what motive did that world-purifying stream choose to wash all the three regions (heaven, earth and the space intervening them)? How did the Gaṅgā, which takes a threefold course, come to be known as the foremost of rivers? (3)

प्रियु लोकेषु धर्मज कर्मधिः: कै: सम्पन्विता।

तथा ब्रविति काकुत्स्थे विश्वामित्रसत्पोधन: ॥ 4  ॥

निश्रलेन कथां सर्वांगमिधमध्ये न्यवेदत्।

पुरा राम कृतोद्वाह: शिजितकपठो महातपान: ।

दूद्धा च भगवान् देवाँ मैथुनायोपचक्रमे ॥ 5  ॥

तत्थ संक्रीडमानस्य महादेवस्य धीमतः ।

शिजितकपठस्य देवस्य दिख्यं वर्षशतं गतम् ॥ 6  ॥

"With what achievements is she associated in the three worlds, O knower of Dharma (what is right)?" While Śri Rāma (a scion of Kakuttsha) was speaking thus, Viśwāmitra, who claims askesis as his only wealth, narrated in extenso in the midst of the Rśis, that accompanied him, the whole story as follows: "Seeing Goddess Pārvati by His side, O Rāma, Lord Śiva, who bears a blue patch on His throat, nay, who is noted for His great asceticism and had just married Her, devoted Himself to the delights of conjugal bliss. A hundred celestial years (equivalent to 36,000 human years) rolled past the all-wise Lord Śiva, the Supreme Deity, while He sported with His Spouse.

(4-6)

न चापि तनयो राम तस्यामासीत् परंतप।

सर्वे देवाः समुडुक्ताः पितामहपुरोगमाः ॥ 9  ॥

यदिहोत्पवते भूतं करस्त प्रतिसहिष्यति।

अधिगमय सुरा: सर्वे प्रपिपत्येदेवम्बुच्न।। 8  ॥

देवदेव महादेव लोकस्यास्य हिते तत ।

सुराणां प्रपिपातेन प्रसादं कतुर्महसि ॥ 9  ॥

“Neither any son nor any daughter was, however, born of Her, O Rāma, the chastiser of foes! All the gods with Brahmā, the progenitor of the entire creation, as their leader girded up their loins to stop the amorous sport. For, they said to themselves,

'Who will be able to bear the glory of the offspring that is born of this divine Lady?' Approaching Him and falling prostrate before Him, all the gods addressed to Him the following prayer: 'O Supreme Lord, the adored of all gods, devoted as You are to the good of this universe, be pleased to extend Your grace to us, gods, in response to our prostrations. (7-9)

न लोका धारयिष्यन्त तव तेज: सुरोत्तम।

ब्राहीण तपसा युक्तो देव्या सह तपश्रु॥ 10  ॥

"The worlds or their denizens will not be able to bear Your glory in the shape of Your progeny, O Chief of gods! Therefore, rich as You are in askesis in the form of oneness with Brahma, desist from enjoying the delights of connubial bliss and practise austerities along with Your Divine Consort.

(10)

त्रैलोक्यहितकामार्थे तैजस्तेजसि धारय। रख सर्वांगिमल्लोकान् नालोके कतुमहिंस ॥ 11  ॥

“For the welfare of all the three worlds, which is Your chief concern, pray retain Your vital energy in Your own glorious Self and thereby preserve all these worlds from destruction, for the son that will be born to You will be extremely glorious and will burn all the three worlds. Pray, do not bring about the extinction of the worlds.’ (11)

देवतानां वचः श्रुत्वा सर्वलोकामदेश्रः ।

बाढमित्यब्रवीत् सर्वान् पुनश्रिदमुवाच् है ॥ 12  ॥

धारयिष्याम्यं तेजस्तेजस्वे सहोमया ।

त्रिदशा: पुरियां चैव निवाणमाधिच्छतु ॥ 13  ॥

“Hearing the remonstrance of the gods, Lord Śiva (the suzerain Lord of all the worlds) said ‘Amen !’ And further addressed the following words to them all, so the tradition goes : ‘I alongwith Umā shall retain Our vital energy by dint of Our very glory (retentive power). Let the terrestrial globe as also the other worlds, O gods, live in peace, i.e., free from fear of destruction.

(12-13)

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

员援援 ཞུ་ཡིན་ སྟག་ཡིན་ ཞུ་ཡིན་ ཞུ་ཡིན་ ཞུ་ཡིན་ ཞུ་ཡིད་

ཐར་མཐམ་ ཆུམ་ ཆུམ་ ཆུམ་ ཆུམ་

"But who shall receive that vital fluid of Mine, unsurpassed as it is, which is already shaken from its seat in the heart? Tell Me this, O jewels among gods!" (14)

ཁུམདུམསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསསས

यजेनः श्रुभित ह्रद्य तद् भरा भार्यिष्यति ॥ 15  ॥

Questioned thus by Lord Śiva, the gods thereupon replied to Lord Śiva (whose ensign bears the device of a bull), ‘Earth (who is capable of holding everything) will indeed receive the vital fluid that has got dislodged so far.’ (15)

एवमूक्तः सुरपति: प्रमुभोच महावल:।

तेजसा पृथिवी येन व्यासा सगिरिकानना ॥ 16  ॥

Addressed thus by the gods, the almighty Lord Śiva, the Ruler of gods, let fall His seed, by which was covered the entire globe including the mountains and forests.

(16)

ततो देवा: पुनरिदमूच्छ्यापि हृताशनम्।

आविश्त नं महातेजो रौरं वायुसमवित: ॥ 17  ॥

Thereupon fearing lest the earth may be cracked by being covered all over by the powerful fluid, the gods further addressed the following prayer to the god of fire that feeds on the sacrificial offerings: 'Accompanied by the wind-god (and mobilized by him) suck you the mighty seed of Rudra (the god of destruction).' (17)

तद्यिना पुनव्यांसि संजातं श्रवेतपर्वतम्।

दिव्यं श्रावणं चैव पावकादिव्यसंनिभम् ॥ 18  ॥

यत्र जातो महातेजाः क्रांतिकेयोप्रिसम्भवः ।

अथोमां च शिर्वं चैव देवा: सर्भिणगास्तथा ॥ 19  ॥

पूजयामासुरत्वर्थ सूप्रीतमानसस्तदा ।

अथ शैलस्तुता राम त्रिद्गानिदमब्रवीत् ॥ 20  ॥

समन्यूशपत् सर्वान् क्रोधसंरक्लोचना ।

यस्मात्रिवारिता चाहं संगता पुरकाम्यथा ॥ 21  ॥

अपल्टं स्वेषु दारेषु नोतयादियतुमहंथ ।

अद्यप्रभुति युभ्याकमप्रजा: सन्तु पल्पय: ॥ 22  ॥

Concentrated by fire (assisted by the wind-god), it now got consolidated into a white mountain and was subsequently transformed into a thicket of white reeds resplendent as fire and the sun, in which was born the exceptionally glorious Kartikeya (so-called because he was suckled later on by the deities presiding over the group of stars known by the name of Krttikās), who is accordingly spoken of as fire-born. "Highly delighted in mind on that occasion, the gods including the hosts of Rṣis that accompanied them, now profusely worshipped Umā and, even so, Lord Śiva. Thereupon Umā, Daughter of Himavān, with eyes bloodshot through anger pronounced an imprecation on all gods and angrily addressed them as follows: 'Since I, who was united with My Spouse with the desire of getting a son, have been deterred from the act by you, you shall no longer be able to beget an offspring through your respective consorts. Let your wives remain isuseless from this day.' (18-22)

एवमुक्ल्वा सुरान् सर्वान् श्रणाप पृथिवीमीपि।

अवने नैकरूपा त्वं बहुभायां भविष्यसि ॥ 23  ॥

Having addressed all the gods as aforesaid, she cursed Earth, too, in the following words: 'You will have a multiform surface, O earth, and shall have many masters. (23)

न च पुत्रकृता प्रीति मत्कोधकल्पीकृता।

प्राप्यसि तं सुदुर्मेधो मम पुत्रमनिछ्छती ॥ 24  ॥

'Agitated by My curse, nor shall you enjoy the delight of having a son,* O highly evil-minded lady, since you do not wish that I should have a son.' (24)

तान् सर्वान् पीडितान् दृष्टा सुरान् सुरपातितस्तदा ।

गमनायोपचक्राम दिहां कल्णपालिताम् ॥ 25  ॥

* The demon Naraka, the son born of the union of Mother Earth with Her Consort, Lord Vişnu, manifested as the divine Boar, was later on killed by the same Lord in the form of Śri Kṛṣna.



Seeing all those gods tormented by the curse of His Spouse, Lord Śiva (the Ruler of gods) prepared to proceed in a westerly direction, the quarter ruled over by Varuna, the god of water. (25)

स गत्वा तय आतिछत् पाश्वैं तय्योत्ते गिरेः ।

हिमवत्प्रभवे शुज्ञे सह देल्या महेश्वः ॥ 26  ॥

Going there the celebrated Lord Śiva, the supreme Divinity, took to asceticism along with His Consort, Goddess Pārvati,

on the summit called Himavatprabhava in the northern wing of the celebrated mountain, Himalaya." (26)

एष ते विस्तरो राम शेलपुर्या निवेदितः ।

गड़ाया: प्रभवं चैव शणु मे सहलक्षण। 27 ॥

In this way have I told you, O Rāma, a detailed account of Goddess Uma, Daughter of Himavān. Now hear from me along with Lakṣmana the story of the origin of the Gāngā too. (27)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे

पट्रिंशः: सर्ग: ॥ 36  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-six in the Bálakāndā of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

ससत्रिंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXXVII

A detailed account of Kartikeya's birth through Gānga

तप्यमाने तदा देखे सेन्द्रा: सारिनपुरोगमाः।

सेनापतिमभीयन्तः पितातमहमुपागमन् ॥ 1  ॥

"At that time, while the divinity, Lord Śiva was busy practising austerities along with His Consort, Goddess Umā, the gods along with Indra (their ruler) and accompanied by the god of fire as their leader approached Brahmā, the progenitor of the entire creation, seeking to secure a commander for their forces. (1)

ततो.अवून सुरा: सर्वे भगवन्ते पितामहम्।

प्रधिपत्य सुरा राम सेन्द्रा: सानिपनुरोगमाः ॥ 2  ॥

"Falling prostrate before him, all the gods including Indra and accompanied by the god of fire as their leader thereupon addressed the venerable Brahmā as follows, O Rāma (the delighter of gods): (2)

येन सेनापतिर्देव दत्तो भगवता पुरा।

स तप: परमास्थाय तपते सम सहोमया ॥ 3  ॥

“Resorting to supreme asceticism, the almighty Lord Śiva, O glorious one, by whom

a commander for our forces was vouchsafed in the form of seed some time back is practising austerities alongwith Goddess Umā, His Consort. (3)

यदत्रानन्तरं कार्यं लोकानां हितकामया।

संविधास्त्व विधानञ़ त्वं हि न: परमा गति: ॥ 4  ॥

“Pray, accomplish what should be done next in this connection with the intention of doing good to the worlds, O knower of expedients, since you are our supreme resort.’ (4)

देवतानां वचः श्रुत्वा सर्वलोकपितामहः ।

सान्वयन् मधुरैवांक्यैस्विदशगानिदमब्रवीत् ॥ 5  ॥

"Hearing the submission of the gods, Brahma, the progenitor of the whole universe, addressed the following words to the gods, comforting them with sweet assurances. (5)

शैलपुत्रा यदुक्तं तत्र प्रजा: स्वासु पत्निषु।

तत्या वचनमविक्लटं सत्यमेव न संशय: ॥ 6  ॥

“What has been uttered by Goddess Pārvati, the daughter of Himavān, viz., that

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

you will have no progeny through your wives must be true: there is no doubt about it; for, Her imprecation is unobstructed. (6)

इयमाकाशगझ़ा च यस्यां पुंई हुताशन:।

जनयिथ्यति देवानां सेनापतिमिर्दमम्॥ 9  ॥

“Here is the heavenly Gaṅgā, through whom the god of fire will, by placing in her the seed of Lord Śiva, cause to be born a son capable of subduing his enemies, who will turn out to be the commander of the celestial armies. (7)

न्येष्ठ शैलेन्द्रवृहिता मानिथ्यति तं सुतम्।

उमायास्तद्धुमतं पंविष्यति न संशय: ॥ 8 ॥

“Gangā, the elder daughter of the king of mountains, will account him as her own son and that belief of hers will be made much of even by Umā, her younger sister: there is no doubt about it.” (8)

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य कृताधां रघुनन्दन।

प्रधिपय सुरा: सर्वे पितामहभपूजन्।। 9 ।।

“Satisfied to hear the above reply of Brahmā and falling prostrate before him, O scion of Raghu, all the gods venerated him. (9)

ते गत्वा परमं राम कैलासं धातुमण्डतम्।

अर्सन नियोजयामासु: पुत्रार्थं सर्ववैदताः। 10 ।।

“Reaching the most excellent Kailāsa, rich in minerals, O Rāma, all the divinities urged the god of fire to produce a son fit to command the celestial armies. (10)

देवकायर्यमिदं देव समाधत्व वृत्ताशन।

शैलपूर्यां महतोजो गड़ायां तेज उत्सृज। 11 ।।

“They said to him, ‘Accomplish this object of gods, O exceptionally glorious god of fire ! Place in Gaṅgā, the daughter of Himavān, the seed of Lord Śiva borne by you.’ (11)

देवतानां प्रतिज्ञाय गड़ामभ्येय पावकः।

गर्भ धारय वै देवि देवतानामिदं प्रियम् ॥ 12  ॥

“Making a promise to the gods to accomplish their aforesaid purpose and,

approaching the heavenly Gaṅgā, the god of fire prayed to her as follows: 'Pray, place in yourself the seed of Lord Śiva, captured and retained by me; for such is the pleasure of gods.' (12)

इत्येतद् वचनं श्रुला दिव्यं रूपमधारयत्।

स तस्या महिमां दृष्टा समन्ताद्वर्शीर्यत् ॥ 13  ॥

"Hearing the aforesaid request of the god of fire, the celestial river assumed an ethereal living form. Beholding her exquisiteness of form, the seed of Lord Śiva melted on all sides. (13)

समन्तस्तदा देवीमध्यिष्ठत पावकः।

सर्वश्रोतांस पूर्णानि गज्ञाया सघुनन्दन ॥ 14  ॥

"The god of fire then impregnated her on all sides in such a way that all her veins were saturated with the seed, O scion of Raghu!

तमुवाच ततो गज्ञा सर्वदेवपुरीमम्।

अशक्ता धारणे देव तेजस्तव समुद्धतम् ॥ 15  ॥

दह्यामानाभिन्ना तेन सम्यव्थितवतेनाना ।

अथाब्बवीदिंट गज्ञां सर्वदेवहुताशन: ॥ 16  ॥

“Burning with that fiery seed and with her mind extremely agonized, Ganga thereupon spoke as follows to the celebrated god of fire, the leader of all the gods: ‘I am unable, O shining one, to bear the seed of Lord Śiva, intensified by thine own.’ The god of fire, who consumes the offerings intended for all gods, made the following reply to Ganga’s: (15-16)

इह हैमवते पाशवें नर्पाँद्य संनिवेश्यताम्।

श्रुत्वा त्विनचचो गुक्ता तं नर्पभमित्यात्यम् ॥ 17  ॥

उत्ससर्ज महातेजा: स्रोतोभ्यो हि तदानाय ।

यद्यसा निर्गतं तस्मात् ततजाम्यन्तदप्रभम् ॥ 18  ॥

"The sixth seed may kindly be discharged on this offshoot of the Himálayas.' Hearing the aforesaid suggestion of the god of fire, the exceptionally glorious Gangā for her part expelled from her veins that very moment that most resplendent seed, O sinless Rāma! Since it emerged from the body of Gangā, a



grand-daughter of Sumeru, a mountain of gold, it shone accordingly as molten gold of the purest type. (17-18)

काङ़न धरणों प्रास हिरणयमतुलप्रभम्।

ताम्र काणायंस चैव तैक्ष्यादेवाधिकायास। 19 ।॥

"Its residue that fell on earth turned into gold and silver of matchless splendour. Due to the very severity of its heat even distant areas were converted into copper and iron. (19)

मलं तस्याभवत् तत्र जपु सीसकमेव च।

तदेतद् धरणीं प्राय्य नानाशातुरबक्षिति ॥ 20  ॥

“Its dross turned into tin and lead on the earth. In this way on reaching the earth the seed (of Lord Śiva) grew to be various metals. (20)

निश्रममात्र गर्भे तु तेजोभिरभराङ्गतम्।

सर्वे पर्वतसेन्द्र सौवर्णभवद् वनम् ॥ 21  ॥

"The moment the seed was deposited on earth, really speaking the entire thicket of white reeds referred to (in verse 18 of Canto XXXVI) above, along with the white mountain was irradiated with its splendour and turned into gold. (21)

जातरूपमिति ख्यातं तदाप्रभुति राचव।

सुवर्णं पुरुषव्याप्र हुताशनसमप्रभम्।

तृणवृक्षलतागुल्मं सर्वं भवति काऊझनम् ॥ 22  ॥

"From that time onward, O scion of Raghu, gold, which shines like fire, came to be known as Jātārūpa, because it was at that time that its splendid form was brought to light, O tiger among men! and the grass, the creeper plants, the trees and the Gulma—all turned into gold by the contact of that seed. (22)

तं कुभारं ततो जाते सेन्द्रा: सहमरुद्गण:।

श्रीरस्मधावनाथाय कुतिका: समयोजय।। 23  ॥

"Theorem of the hosts of gods along with Indra, their ruler, brought together the boy thus born as well as the Kṛttikās (the female deities presiding over the group of six stars

forming the constellation of that name) in a body for the purpose of suckling the babe. (23)

ता: क्षीरं जातमात्रस्य कृत्वा समयमुत्तमम्।

ददु: पुत्रोउयस्माकं सर्वसामिति निश्रिता: ॥ 24  ॥

"Having arrived at a sublime understanding that the babe in question would be the son of them all and determined accordingly, they (synchronously) suckled the boy as soon as he was born. (24)

ततस्तु देवता: सर्वा: कार्तिकेश इति बुवन्।

पुरस्मैलोक्यविख्यातो भविष्यति न संशय: ॥ 25  ॥

"Thereupon all the gods said, 'The boy will be celebrated in all the three worlds (heaven, earth and the space intervening them) as a son of the Krttikās : there is no doubt about it.' (25)

तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुला स्कनं नर्भपरिस्वे ।

सापयन् परया लक्ष्या दीव्यमानं यथानतम् ॥ 26  ॥

"Hearing the aforesaid utterance of the gods which was so agreeable to them, the Krittikās bathed the babe that had first trickled down in the form of seed from the body of Lord Śiva and again on its oozing from the womb of Gaṅgā shone with supreme effulgence like fire. (26)

स्कन्द इत्यबुवन् देवा: स्कनं गर्भभिरस्वे।

कार्तिकेय महाबाहुं काकुत्थ ज्वलनोपमम् ॥ 27  ॥

"The gods named the mighty-armed son of the Krttikas, who was effulgent as fire, O scion of Kakutstha, as Skanda (from the root 'Skand'—to flow) because he had slipped from the womb of Gaṅgā. (27)

प्रादुभूत ततः क्षीरं कृतिकानामनुतनम्।

घणणां घडाननो भूत्वा जग्राह स्तनजं पयः ॥ 28  ॥

गृहीत्वा क्षीरमेकाढ़ा सुकुमारवपुस्तदा ।

अजयत् स्थेन वीयैण दैत्यसैन्यगणान् विधुः ॥ 29  ॥

सुरसेनागणपतिमध्ययिष्ठान् महायुतिम्।

ततस्तममरा: सर्वे सम्योपानिपुरगमाः ॥ 30  ॥

"Then there appeared milk, excelled by no other milk, in the breasts of the



Krttikás, and growing six-faced, the babe sucked the milk flowing from the breasts of all the six together. Having sucked their milk only for a day the boy, though tender of body, grew so powerful even then that he gradually conquered by sheer dint of his might several divisions of the demon army. Meeting together all the gods, headed by the god of fire, then installed with due ceremony that exceptionally glorious boy as the commander of the celestial forces.

(28-30)

एप ते राम गड़्चायां विस्तरीशभिहितो मया।

कुमारसाम्बवश्रैव धन्य: पुण्यतथैव च।। 31 ।।

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वात्मीकोंने आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे सतर्पिशः सर्पि: ॥ 37  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-seven in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

अष्टार्थिश: सर्ग:

Canto XXXVIII

The narrative of King Sagara, a former king of Ayodhyā and a forefather of Śrī Rāma

तां कथां कोशिकां रामे निवेश मधुराक्षरम्।

पुनेरवापरं वाकयं काकुत्थविदमपत्रवीत्। 1 1  ॥

Having narrated to Śri Rāma in sweet accents the aforesaid story, Viśwāmitra, a scion of Kuśa, further related the following other narrative to the scion of Kakuttsha.

(1)

अयोध्यापितवीर पूर्वमासीनाराधय: ।

सगरो नाम धर्मात्मा प्रजाकामः स चाप्रजः ॥ 2  ॥

"In the days of old, O heroic Rāma, there was a king, Sagara by name, who ruled over Ayodhyā, and whose mind was given to piety. And being issueless he longed for progeny. (2)

वैद्धर्मद्धुता राम केशिणी नाम नामतः ।

ज्येष्ठा समरणसी सा धर्मिष्ठा सत्यवादिनी ॥ 3  ॥

"A daughter of the king of Vidarbha,

known by the name of Keśini, O Rāma, was the eldest wife of Sagara. She was extremely pious and truthful. (3)

अरिष्टनेमेदुर्हिता सुपर्णभिनी तु सा ।

द्वितीया सगरस्यासीत् पली सुमतिसंज्ञता ॥ 4  ॥

"The second wife of Sagara was named as Sumati. She was really speaking a daughter of the sage Arisṭanemi (nicknamed Kaśyapa) and a sister of Suparna (another name of Garuda, the king of birds and the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu). (4)

ताथ्यां सह महाराज: पत्नीथां तसावंस्तप: ।

हिंमवन्तं समासाद्ध भुग्रस्वणि गिरगे ।।   ।।

"Having reached the Himalaya mountain, the great king practised asceticism on an offshoot of the Himalayas, Bhgru-Prasravana by name, along with his aforesaid two wives. (5)



अथ वर्षशते पूर्णों तपसाउउराधितो मुनिनः।

समगरय वरं प्रादाद् भृगुः सत्यवर्तां वरः ॥ 6  ॥

"Propitiated by his askesis, the sage Bhrgu (a mind-born son of Brahma), the foremost of the votaries of truth, conferred a boon on Sagara when a hundred years had been completed. (6)

अपत्यलाभः सुमहान् भविष्यति तलायन।।

कॉति चाप्तिमां लोके प्राय्यसे पुरुषर्षभे ॥ 7  ॥

"He said, 'good many sons will be born to you, O sinless one, and you will attain unequalled fame in the world, O jewel among men! (7)

एका जनयिता तात पूरं वंशकरं तव ।

षटि पुरसहस्वाणि अपरा जनथिष्यति ॥ 8  ॥

“One wife of yours will bear you a son that will perpetuate your race, O dear one; while the other will give birth to sixty thousand sons.” (8)

भाषमाणं महात्यानं राजपुत्र्ये प्रसाठ तम्।

ऊचतुः परमप्रीते कृताझलिपुटे तदा ॥ 9  ॥

"Propitiating that exalted soul, the sage Bhrgu, while he was speaking as aforesaid, the two princesses, the daughters of the king of Vidarbha and the sage Kaśyapa, a king of sages, respectively, who were supremely delighted to hear of the boon granted by him, submitted on that occasion with folded hands as follows: (9)

एकः कल्याः सुतो बहान् का बहूझनधियति ।

श्रौतुभिछाबहे बहान् सत्यमस्तु वचस्तव ॥ 10  ॥

"We wish to hear by which of us will be borne a single son and which, O holy one, will give birth to many. Let your prediction be true, O sage!" (10)

त्योस्तद् वचनं श्रुवा भगुः परमधार्मिकः ।

उवाच परमां वाणों स्वच्छन्दोउ विधीयताम् ॥ 11  ॥

"Hearing that question of theirs, the supremely pious Bhrgu gave the following excellent reply: 'Let your own will be enforced in this matter. (11)

एको वंशकारो वास्तु बह्वो वा महाबलाः।

कीर्तिमन्तो महोलसाहा: का वा के वरमिच्छति ॥ 12  ॥

“In one case there will be a single son that will perpetuate the race and in the other many mighty and renowned sons full of great daring. Which of you would have which boon?” (12)

मुनेस्तु वचनं श्रुता केशिणी रघुनन्दन ।

पुत्रं वंशकरं राम जग्राह नुपसंनिधौ ॥ 13  ॥

"Hearing the sage's reply, Keśini, the senior queen, for her part, O scion of Raghu, preferred in the presence of the king a son that would perpetuate the line, O Rama. (13)

षित्टे पुरसहस्वाशि सुपर्णभगिनी तदा ।

महोत्साहानु कर्जितमन्तो जग्राह सुमति: सुतान् ॥ 14  ॥

"Thereupon Sumati, Garuda's sister, sought sixty thousand renowned sons full of great daring. (14)

प्रदक्षिणमृषिं कृला शिरसाधिप्रणाय तम्।

जगाम स्वपुरं राजा सभायों रघुनन्दन ॥ 15  ॥

"Going round the sage clockwise and saluting him with his head bent low, the king returned to his capital with his wives, O Rama! (15)

अथ काले गते तस्य चेष्ठा पूरं व्याजायत ।

असमझ इति छातां केशिनी समारात्मम् ॥ 16  ॥

"Now, when the time was ripe, the senior queen, Keśini, bore Sagara a son, known by the name of Asamañja, sprung from his loins. (16)

सुमितस्तु नरव्याप्र गर्भतुभ्यं व्याजायत ।

पथिटः पुरसहस्त्राणि तुल्यभेदात् विनिस्युता: ॥ 17  ॥

"Sumati, on the other hand, O tiger among men, brought forth a foetus shaped like a bitter gourd. On the gourd being split up sixty thousand male issues emerged from it. (17)

चृतपूर्णेषु कुभ्येषु धात्यस्तान् समवधेयन्त्।

कालेन महता सर्वे योवन्तं प्रतिधिरे ॥ 18  ॥

"The nurses nurtured them placing them

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

in jars full of ghee. After a considerable period of time all attained maturity. (18)

अथ दीर्घिग कालेन रूपयीवनशालिन: 1

पथिट: पुत्रसह्श्वाणि सगरस्याभवंस्तदा ॥ 91  ॥

"Then after a long time sixty thousand sons endowed with comeliness and youthful vigour now stood by the side of King Sagara. (19)

स च ज्येष्ठो नरश्रेष्ठ सगरस्यात्मसभ्यः। बालान् गृहीत्वा तु जले सरव्या सघुनन्दन ॥ 20  ॥ प्रश्रिष्य प्राहसन्नियं मजतस्तान् निरीक्ष्य वै। एवं पायसमाचार: सघनजप्रतिबाधकः ॥ 21  ॥ पौराणामहिते युक्तः पित्रा निवर्षिसतः पुरात्। तस्य पुत्रोंउग्गमान् नाम असमझस्य वीर्यैवान् ॥ 22  ॥ समन्तः सर्वलोकस्य सर्वस्यापि प्रियंवदः। ततः कालेन महता मति: समर्पभाजात्। सगरस्य नरश्रेष्ठ यजेयमिति निश्रिता ॥ 23  ॥ स कृत्वा निश्रयं राजा सोपाध्यायगणस्तदा। यजकर्मणि वेदजो यटुं समुपचक्रमे ॥ 24  ॥

"The aforesaid eldest son of Sagara, however, O jewel among men, actually caught hold of infants, O scion of Raghu, everyday and, throwing them into the waters of the Sarayū, openly and heartily laughed to see them drowning. Thus given to sinful conduct and tormenting pious men and intent on doing harm to the citizens, the youth was exiled by his father from the capital. The valiant son of the aforesaid Asamānja, Arīsūmān by name, on the other hand, was beloved of all people and spoke kindly to all. Then after a considerable period of time a firm resolve was made by Sagara that he should perform a sacrifice, O jewel among men! Having resolved upon a sacrificial performance, the aforesaid king, who was well-versed in the Vedas, made ready that very moment to undertake a sacrifice along with the help of his family-priests."

(20-24)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेउर्गाशिंत्रसः सर्ग: ॥ 38  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-eight in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

एकोनचत्वारिंश: सर्ग:

Canto XXXIX

Indra steals away the horse released by Sagara as a prelude to his horse-sacrifice; his sixty thousand sons proceed to excavate the earth in quest of the horse and the gods in terror apprise Brahma of this daring of theirs

विश्वासभिवरचः श्रुता कथाने रघुनन्दनः ।

उवाच परमप्रीतो मुनिं दीसमिवाननम् ॥ 1  ॥

Śri Rāma, a scion of Raghu, felt supremely delighted to hear the speech of Viswāmitra. At the end of the discourse he spoke as follows, to the sage who shone as fire: (1)

श्रीतुमिच्छामि भई ते विस्तरेण कथामिमम्।

पूर्वजी मे कर्थ ब्रह्ना् यजं वै समुपाहर्त्।। 2 ।।

"May God bless you, I wish to hear this story at length. How did my forefather, King Sagara, perform the sacrifice, O holy one?" (2)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुला कौहृललमवित्तः। विश्वामित्रस्तु काकृलथ्मुवाच प्रहस्रवि। 3 ।।

Seized with wonder to hear that question of Śrī Rāma, Viśwāmitra for his part replied to the scion of Kakuttsha as follows as though laughing heartily : (3)

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

श्रयतां विस्तरो राम सगरस्य महात्मन: ।

शंकररश्वरुगो नामा हिमवानिति विश्रुत: ॥ 4  ॥

विक्रयपर्वतमासाठा निरीक्षेते परस्यम्।

त्योर्मधे समभवद् यजः स पुरुषोत्तम ॥ 5  ॥

"Hear, O Rama, a detailed account of the sacrificial performance of the high-souled Sagara. The father-in-law of Lord Śaṅkara, widely known by the name of Himavān, and the Vindhya mountain gaze on one another, Himavān overlooking Vindhya and vice versa. The aforesaid sacrifice took place in the region lying between the two ranges, O chief of men! (4-5)

स हि देशो नर्याप्र प्रशस्तो व्रकर्मणि ।

तस्यार्वचर्यां काकुत्स्थ दुर्द्धन्वा महारथः ॥ 6  ॥

अंशुमानकारोत् तात समारस्य मते स्थितः ।

तस्य पर्वीण ते व्रंत्रे यजमानस्य वासवः ॥ 7  ॥

राक्षसीं तनुमास्थाय यज्ञायश्रमापाहर्त् ।

हिंयमाणे तु काकुत्स्थ तस्मिन्नखे महात्मनः ॥ 8  ॥

उपाध्यायगणाः सर्वे यजमानमथाबूब्न् ।

अयं पर्वीण वेगेन यज्ञायश्लोप्रपनीयते ॥ 9  ॥

हर्तरें जहि काकुत्स्थ हयश्चैवोपनीयातम् ।

यज्ञच्छत्रं भवत्येत्न् सर्वेषामशिवाय नः ॥ 10  ॥

"That land,* O tiger among men, is really commended for a sacrificial performance. Remaining at Sagara's beck and call, O dear Rāma (a scion of Kakuttha), Arīsūmān, a great car-warrior, who was armed with a strong bow played the role of attending the sacrificial horse during its wanderings as its guard. Assuming the semblance of an ogre Indra stole away the sacrificial horse of Sagara, while he was busy performing the said sacrifice on the day of Ukthya (a liturgical ceremony). While the aforesaid horse of the high-souled Sagara was actually being taken away, all the priests

officiating at the sacrifice forthwith addressed the sacrificer as follows: 'On the day of Ukthya, the sacrificial horse is being taken away with vehemence over there. Kill the thief, O scion of Kakutstha, and let the horse be recovered. This obstruction in the sacrificial performance is calculated to bring ill-luck to us all. (6-10)

तत तथा क्रियतां राजन् यज्ञेप्त्रिक: कृतो भवेत्।

सोपाधायवचः शुत्वा तत्सिन् सदसि पार्थिव: ॥ 11  ॥

षीध्टं पुरसहस्त्राणि वाक्यमेततुद्वाच ह।।

गतिं पुत्रा न पश्यामि रक्षसां पुरुषर्षभाः ॥ 12  ॥

मज्यपुतेर्महाभागैरास्थितो हि महाकतु: ।

तद् गच्छथ विविच्चवधं पुत्रका भद्रमस्तु वः ॥ 13  ॥

'Therefore, it may be so arranged, O king, that the sacrificial performance is cleared of this impediment.' Hearing the report of the priests including the family-priest, gathered in that assembly, the king addressed the following words to his sixty thousand sons: so the tradition goes: "I do not perceive, my sons, even the access of ogres to this sacrificial performance, O jewels among men, since this great sacrifice is presided over by highly blessed souls consecrated by the recitation of holy texts. Therefore, go and track out the thief, my beloved sons; may good luck attend you all.

(11-13)

समुद्रमातिनों सर्वा पृथिवीमनुगछ्ध ।

एकैकं योजनं पुत्रा विस्तारामभिगछ्तत ॥ 14  ॥

'Ransack the entire globe encircled by the oceans. Apportion to yourselves, my sons, land with an area of one square Yojana (64 sq. miles) each and scour it. (14)

यावत् तुगमवंर्गसतावत् खतन मेदितनीम्।

तमेव हयहतिंर मार्गमाणा ममाज्ञा ॥ 15  ॥

* The region intervening the Vindhyan and Himalayan ranges has been designated as Āryāvarta and declared in the Śāstras as sacred—

आयर्वतर्न: पुरायभूमिमंथ हिमवद्विक्ययो: ।

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

'If, however, you fail to trace him on the earth's surface, excavate the earth under my order, looking about for the very individual who has stolen away the horse, till the horse is found. (15)

दौक्षितः पोत्रसहितः सोपाध्यायगणस्वहम्।

इह स्थायामि भई को यावत् तुरगर्शनम् ॥ 16  ॥

'I for my part, who stand consecrated, will stay here alongwith my grandson, Arîsûmân, and the priests officiating at the sacrifice till the horse is in sight; may good betide you.' (16)

ते सर्वे हृद्यमनो राजपुत्रा महाबाला:।

जगमुर्मेतीलं राम पितुर्वचनयित्ना: ॥ 17  ॥

"Bound by the words of their father, all those very mighty princes traversed the earth's surface with a delighted mind, O Rāma! (17)

गत्वा तु पृथिवीं सर्वामद्धुःा तं महाबलः।।

योजनायामवित्तारमेकीको धरणीतलम्।

विधिपु: पुरुषव्यापा वजस्पर्शसमेधुर्जै: ॥ 18  ॥

"Traversing the whole earth and yet not finding the horse, the mighty princes, who were tigers among men, started excavating the earth with their arms whose impact was as hard as that of a thunderbolt, each digging land covering an area of one square Yojana or sixty-four square miles.

(18)

शूलैरशनिकल्यैश्छ हलैश्वापि सुदारुणै:।

भिव्यमाना वसुमती ननाद रघुनन्दन ॥ 11  ॥

"The earth groaned even as it was being dug with pikes hard as adamant as well as with most formidable ploughshares, O scion of Raghu ! (19)

नागानां वक्ष्यमानामसूराणों च राघव।

राक्षसानां दुराधक्षे: सत्त्वानां निन्दो3पन्ध।। 20 ।।

"There was a loud roar, that could not be easily repressed, of Nāgas, demons, ogres and other living beings inhabiting the

subterranean regions, that were being killed in the course of the excavation. (20)

योजनानां सहस्वाणि घटिंट् तु रघुनन्दन।

विभिन्दुर्शरणों राम रसातलमनुतमम्। 21  ॥

"They excavated, O scion of Raghu, land covering an area of sixty thousand square Yojanas as if to reach Rasātala (the sixth or penultimate subterranean sphere), a region excelled by no other sphere in point of beauty, splendour and amenities of life, O Rama!

एवं पर्वतस्वाध्यं जक्बूद्वीपं नृपात्मजा:।

खनन्तो नृपशादूल सर्वतः परिचकमु: ॥ 22  ॥

"In this way, O tiger among princes, the sixty thousand sons of Sagara went about excavating in all directions the land of Jambduwipa, thick with mountains. (22)

ततो देवा: समाध्वर्षा: सासुरपा: सहप्रपाता:।

सध्धान्तमनस: सर्वे पितामहमुपागमम् ॥ 23  ॥

"Agitated in mind, gods including Gandharvas, demons and Nāgas, all sought the presence of Brahmā, the progenitor of the entire creation. (23)

ते प्रसाध महात्मानं विष्णणवद्नास्तदा ।

ऊचु: परमसंत्रस्ता: पितामहमिदं वच: ॥ 24  ॥

"Glorifying the high-souled Brahmā on that occasion, they made the following submission to him with a doleful face, greatly alarmed as they were: (24)

भगवन् पृथिवी सर्वा खानते सगरात्मजै:।

बह्वश्र महात्मानो वध्यन्ते जलचारिगर: ॥ 25  ॥

“O Lord, the entire globe is being excavated and many exalted souls and aquatic animals killed in the process by the sons of Sagara. (25)

अयं यज्ञह्नोउसाकमनेनाश्वोउपनीयते।

इति ते सर्वभृतातिन हिंसत्सि सगरात्माजा: ॥ 26  ॥

"The aforesaid sons of Sagara are destroying all created beings suspecting

* VÄLMÍKI-ŘAMÁYANA *

that whosoever comes before them has interfered with their sacrificial performance

and that the sacrificial horse has been taken away by him.' (26)

इत्यार्थ श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोये आदिकाव्ये बालकार्डे एकोनचत्वारिशः सर्ग: ॥ 39  ॥

Thus ends Canto Thirty-nine in the Bálakanda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

चत्वारिश: सर्ग:

Canto XL

Brahmā reassures the gods by telling them that the sons of Sagara will be destroyed by the curse of Sage Kapila. The sons of Sagara in the course of their excavation arrive in the presence of Kapila and, behaving insolently towards him, are forthwith reduced to ashes by the fire of his wrath

देवतानां वचः श्रुता भगवान् वै पितामहः ।

प्रत्युवाच सुसंग्रस्तान् कृतातनबलमोहितान् ॥ 9  ॥

"Hearing the representation of the gods the venerable Brahmā replied as follows to the gods, who were greatly alarmed, and had been thrown into confusion by the might of the sons of Sagara, who had brought about the destruction of living beings on a large scale: (1)

यस्येयं वसुधा कृत्ना वासुदेवस्य धीमतः ।

महिषी माधवस्यैया स एव भगवान् प्रभु: ॥ 2  ॥

कारितं रूपमाध्यथ आयत्यनिर्णं शयम् ।

तस्य कोपारिनना दर्शा भविष्यन्ति नृपातम्बा: ॥ 3  ॥

"This Goddess Earth is a Consort of the all-wise Lord Viṣṇu, the Spouse of Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, to whom this entire globe belongs. Assuming the form of Kapila the same almighty Lord incessantly supports the earth by dint of His yogic power. The sons of Sagara will be shortly consumed by the fire of His wrath. (2-3)

पृथिव्याश्प पिन्धेदो दृष्ट एव सतानतः ।

सगरस्य च पुत्राणं विनाशो दीर्घदर्शिनाम् ॥ 4  ॥

"The excavation of the earth invariably

takes place in every Kalpa. And the destruction of the sons of Sagara too is foreseen by men possessing a long range of vision. Hence there is no occasion for grief on this account either." (4)

वितामहचः श्रुता जयसैंशदादिदमा: ।

देवा: परमसेंह्यः पुनर्जमृर्थयातमम् ॥   ॥ ॥

Hearing the reply of Brahma, the progenitor of the entire creation, the gods, thirty-three* in number, all capable of subduing their enemy, returned extremely delighted to their respective abode the way they had come. (5)

सारस्य च पुत्राणां प्रादुर्गसीम्हाल्वन: ।

पृथिव्यां भिछ्यानानां निष्यतिसमनि:स्वन: ॥ 6  ॥

And while the earth was being excavated at the hands of Sagara's sons, there arose a terrific sound like that of a thunderstorm. (6)

तन्ते भिन्चा महीं स्वर्ग कृत्वा चापि प्रदक्षिणम्।

सहिता: सागरा: सर्वे पितरं वाक्यमब्रुवन् ॥ 7  ॥

Having walked round the whole earth and excavated it too, all the sons of Sagara then sought the presence of their father

* The thirty-three principal gods are the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve Ádityas and the two Aświnīkumāras (the twin-born physicians of gods).



and jointly made the following submission to him : (7)

परिकान्ता मही सर्वा सत्त्ववन्ध्र्य सूरिता:।

देवदानवरक्षांसि विश्ञाचोरपत्रबगा:॥ 8  ॥

"The entire globe has been circumambulated and excavated and powerful gods, demons and ogres, fiends, serpents and Nāgas destroyed by us. (8)

न च प्रयामहेउर्वं ते अश्रह्तारमेव च।

किं कारीच्याम भई ते बुद्धिद्रत्र विचार्यतामू॥ 9  ॥

"Yet we have neither been able to trace the horse nor the stealer of the horse. What shall we do now? May your benign look descend on us and let a further plan of action be thought out for us in this matter."

(9)

तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा पूत्राणां राजसतमः ।

समन्युरब्बविद् वाक्यं सगरो स्युनन्दन ॥ 10  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of those princes, O scion of Raghu, Sagara, the noblest of kings, angrily replied as follows: (10)

भूय: खतत भई जो विभेष्ठ वसुधातलम्।

अश्रहतारमासाठि कृताधांशि निवर्तित ॥ 11  ॥

"May prosperity attend you, excavate the earth further and, breaking it open, trace the stealer of the horse and return only when you have accomplished your purpose." (11)

पितृत्वंचनमासाठि सारास्य महातन: ।

षष्टि: पुत्रसहचाणि रसातलमधिप्रद्वन् ॥ 12  ॥

Bowing to the command of their high-souled father, Sagara, the sixty thousand princes dug their way into Rasātala. (12)

खन्यमाने ततस्तस्मिन् ददुशु: पर्वतोपमम्।

दिशागर्ज विल्पाङ्गे धारयन्ते महीतलम् ॥ 13  ॥

Even while the earth was being further tunnelled, they saw as a sequel to that excavation an elephant huge as a mountain, Virūpāksa by name, guarding the eastern quarter and supporting the globe. (13)

सपर्वतवानां कृतलां पृथिवाँ रघुनन्दन।

धारयामास शिरसा विकल्पाक्षो महागज: ॥ 14  ॥

The great elephant Virūpāksa, O scion of Raghu, supported on his head the entire globe including the mountains and forests. (14)

यदा पर्वाण काकुत्थ विश्रमार्थ महागज: ।

खेदाचालयते श्रौर्ष भूमिकम्पतदा भवेत् ॥ 15  ॥

Whenever, from exhaustion, O scion of Kakuttha, the great elephant shakes his head for the sake of relief, a convulsion of the earth's surface ensues. (15)

ते ते प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा दिशपालं महागजम् ।

मानयन्तो हि ते राम जमपुर्भित्वा रसाततम् ॥ 16  ॥

Walking clockwise round that great elephant guarding the quarter, and thereby showing their respect to him, O Rāma, they tunnelled their way through Rasātala indeed. (16)

ततः पूर्वा दिशं भिन्चा दक्षिणां विभिपुः पुनः ।

दक्षिणस्यामपि दिशि ददुगुस्ते महागजम् ॥ 17  ॥

महापयं महात्मानं सुमहत्यवतीपमम्।

शिरसा धारवन्तं गां विस्मयं जम्भुक्तमम् ॥ 18  ॥

Having pierced the eastern quarter they then penetrated the southern quarter too, and in the southern quarter again they found the great elephant, Mahāpadma, endowed with a colossal body resembling a huge mountain and supporting the earth on his head, and experienced great wonder.

(17-18)

ते तं प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा सगरस्य महात्मनः ।

षटि: पुरसहस्थिनि पक्षिमां विभिदुर्दिशम् ॥ 91  ॥

Walking round the elephant from left to right as a mark of respect, the sixty thousand sons of the high-souled Sagara penetrated the western quarter. (19)

पश्रियायामपि दिशि महानमचलोपमम्।

दिशागारां सौमनसं ददुशुस्ते महावलाः ॥ 20  ॥

In the western quarter too those very

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

mighty princes beheld the great elephant guarding that quarter, Saumanasa by name, that resembled a mountain in size. (20)

ते तं प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा पुरुषा चापि निरामयम् ।

खनतः समुपाकाना दिशं सोमवतीं तदा ॥ 21  ॥

Walking round the elephant clockwise and enquiring after his welfare, they then dug their way into the northern quarter, presided over by the moon-god. (21)

उत्तरस्यां रघुश्रिकु ददूर्णहिंमपाणडुम्।

भरं भरेण वपुषा धारयन्ते महीमिमामू।। 22 ॥

In the north, O chief of the Raghus, they saw Bhadra, the elephant guarding that quarter, white as snow, supporting this globe on his beautiful body. (22)

समालध्य ततः सर्वे कृत्वा चैनं प्रदक्षिणम्।

षधि: पुरसहस्राणिं विधिपटुवैभुधातलम्। 23  ॥

Touching the elephant and walking round him from left to right, all the sixty thousand princes set about digging the earth once more. (23)

ततः प्रागृतरां गत्वा सागराः प्रथितां दिशम्।

रोषादभ्यखन्न् सर्वे पृथिखीं सगारात्मवा: ॥ 24  ॥

Proceeding in the celebrated north-easterly direction, presided over by Lord Śiva and as such held sacred for all holy undertakings, all the sons of Sagara continued digging the earth in an agitated mood. (24)

ते तु सर्वे महात्मानो भीमवेगा महाबला:।

ददुर्णुः कपिलं तत्र वासुदेवं सनातनम् ॥ 25  ॥

हयं च तस्य देवस्य चरन्तमविद्युतः।

प्रहर्षमतुलं प्रामा: सर्वे ते रघुनन्दन ॥ 26  ॥

All those high-minded and exceedingly mighty princes, possessed of tremendous speed, actually beheld there the eternal Lord Viṣnu manifested in the form of Sage Kapila, as well as a horse grazing not very far from that glorious sage, on which they all experienced incomparable joy, O scion of Raghu ! (25-26)

ते तं यजहनं ज्ञाला क्रोधयपौकूलसंधगा: ।

खनिरलाङ्गलधारा नानावृक्षशिलाधारा: ॥ 21  ॥

अभ्यधावत संकूद्धासित्व तिक्तेच चाब्बून।

असमाक़ं लं हि तूरगं यज्ञिं हतवानसि ॥ 26  ॥

Thoughtlessly suspecting him to be the man who had interrupted the sacrificial performance by stealing away the sacrificial horse, they felt enraged and rushed towards him with their eyes bedimmed through anger, carrying spades and ploughs and various kinds of trees and rocks, and said, "Stop! Stop !! You alone have stolen our sacrificial horse. (27-28)

दुमैधस्त्व हि सम्यासान् विविड़ नः सगरात्मकान्।

श्रुत्वा तद् वचनं तेषां कपिलो रघुनन्दन ॥ 21  ॥

रोषेण महात५स्विटो हुंकामरकोत् तदा ।

ततस्तेनाप्रमेयण कपिलेन महात्मना ।

भस्मराशीकृता: सर्वे काकुत्स्थ समरामज्ञा: ॥ 30  ॥

"Indeed, you know us to be the sons of Sagara arrived in a body, O evil-minded one!" Seized with fury to hear that threat of theirs, O scion of Raghu, Kapila forthwith uttered the sound 'hum', expressive of contempt. The very next moment the sons of Sagara were all burnt and reduced to a heap of ashes by that high-souled Sage Kapila of immeasurable glory. (29-30)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे

चत्वारिंश: सर्प: ॥ 40  ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

[Unreadable]

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

एक्च्च्वारिश: सर्गे:

Canto XLI

Under orders of Sagara his grandson Arûsmâm proceeds to Rasâtala through the underground passage made by his uncles and, bringing back the sacrificial horse, tells the king about the fate of his uncles

<table><tr><td>पूर्यांश्यराताङ्नाला</td><td>सगते</td><td>रघुनन्दन।</td></tr><tr><td>नसारमब्बवौद्</td><td>राजा द्वीयमानं</td><td>स्वतेजसा॥ 1  ॥</td></tr></table>

Perceiving that his sons had been away for a long time, O scion of Raghu, King Sagara spoke as follows to his grandson, Amśuman, resplendent with his own glory : (1)

शृरूष्छ कृतविद्धश पूर्वैस्तूल्योसि तेजसा।

पितृपुर्णा गतिमविच्छ येन चाध्योउपवाहितः ॥ 2  ॥

"You are valiant and learned and the compeer of your forbears in splendour. Trace the whereabouts of your uncles as well as of the man by whom the sacrificial horse has been stolen away. (2)

अन्तर्भौमानि सत्वानि वीर्यविति महाति च।

तेषां तु प्रतिषातार्थ सासिं गृह्वीष्य कार्यकुम्म।। 3  ॥

"The living beings inhabiting the subterranean regions are full of great prowess and gigantic of body. In order to meet their assault, therefore, take up a bow along with a sword. (3)

अधिव्याधाविधास्तवं हत्वा विर्फकरानापि । सिद्धार्थः संनिवर्तैव मम वज्ञस्य यागाः ॥ 4  ॥

"Bowing to those who deserve to be greeted and at the same time killing those who come in your way, return you only when you have accomplished your purpose, and thus ensure the completion of my sacrificial performance." (4)

एवमुक्तोंउषुमान् सम्यक् सगरेण महात्मना।

धनुरादाय खदूरां च जगामा लघुविकमः ॥ 5  ॥

Duly instructed thus by the high-souled Sagara and taking his bow and sword, Amśumān departed with quick paces. (5)

स खातं निरुभिमर्गमन्तर्पोंमे महात्माथ:।

प्रापघत नरश्रेष्ठ तेन राजापिभ्रोदित:॥ 6  ॥

Urged by the aforesaid king, O jewel among men, he reached in no time the underground passage dug by his high-minded uncles. (6)

देवदानवरशोधिथ: विश्रापचतपगोरगे:।

पूज्यमानं महातेजा दिशगगजमपश्यत ॥ 7  ॥

The exceptionally glorious Arûsmân presently saw an elephant guarding one of the four quarters, that was being worshipped by gods, demons and ogres, fiends, winged creatures and serpents. (7)

स तं प्रदक्षिणं कृता पूधा चैव निरामयम्।

चितून् स परिपघ्छ वारिजहर्तरमेव च ॥ 8  ॥

Walking clockwise round the elephant and inquiring after his welfare, he questioned him about his uncles as well as about the stealer of the sacrificial horse of his father. (8)

दिशागजस्तु तक्छूला प्रत्युवाच महात्मितः।

आसमझ्न कृताधरैस्त्व सहाधः शीघमेध्यसि ॥ 9  ॥

Hearing his aforesaid question, the highly intelligent elephant presiding over the quarter, for his part, replied, "Accomplished of purpose, O son of Asamahja, you will soon come back alongwith the horse." (9)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुला स्वर्गेनिव दिशागजान्।

यथाक्रमं यथान्यायं प्रष्टुं समुपचक्रमे ॥ 10  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid reply of the elephant, Arûsmûan proceeded to ask the same question of all the elephants guarding

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

the quarters in their order of seniority and in a befitting manner. (10)

नैश्रु सर्वैदिशापालैवांक्यत्रैवांक्यकोविधे:।

पूजितः सह्यश्चैवागन्तासील्यिभचोदितः ॥ 11  ॥

He was received with honour by all the elephants guarding all the four quarters—who could easily understand the meaning of others' speech and were equally adept in expression—and told that he would return along with the horse. (11)

तेभां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा जगाम लपुविक्रमः ।

भस्मराशीकृता यत्र पितरस्तस्य सागरा: ॥ 12  ॥

Hearing that reply of theirs, Amśumān repaired with quick paces to the place where his uncles, the sons of Sagara, lay reduced to heaps of ashes. (12)

स दुःखशमापत्रस्वसमझसुतस्तदा।

चुकोश परमातंस्तु वधात् तेषां सुदुःखितः ॥ 13  ॥

Already fallen a prey to affliction on not finding them, the said son of Asamānja for his part thereupon felt deeply distressed over their death and actually cried in great agony. (13)

यद्विरयं च हयं तत्र चरन्तमविद्युतः।

ददर्श पुरुषव्याप्नो दुःखशोकसमिति: ॥ 14  ॥

Nay, full of sorrow and grief the tiger among men also perceived the sacrificial horse grazing on the spot not very far from him. (14)

स तेषां राजपुत्राणां कतुंकामो जलक्रियाम्।

स जलाश्यीं महातेजा न चाप्यशजलाशयम् ॥ 15  ॥

He felt inclined to offer water to the spirits of those princes. Though desirous of water for that purpose, that exceptionally

glorious prince, however, did not come across any reservoir of water nearby. (15)

विसार्यं निपुणां तुद्धिं ततोउपश्यत् खगाधियम्।

चिनुर्णां मातुलं राम सुपर्णमिनलोपम् ॥ 16  ॥

Extending his penetrating vision all round, O Rāma, he then saw Garuda, the king of birds, who is swift as the wind, and the maternal uncle of his uncles. (16)

स चेनमब्रवीट् वाय्वं वैनतेयो महाबल:।

मा शुचः पुरुषव्याप्र वधोउयं लोकसम्मतः ॥ 19  ॥

कपिलेनाप्रमेयेण दर्शा हीमे महाबलाः ।

सलिलं नाहींस प्रात दातुभेषां हि लौकिकम् ॥ 18  ॥

The exceptionally mighty Garuda (son of Vinatā), however, addressed to him the following admonition: “This death of your uncles, O tiger among men, is conducive to the interests of all the three worlds inasmuch as it will serve as an occasion for the advent of the holy Gaṅgā to the terrestrial plane. These exceptionally mighty princes have undoubtedly been burnt to death by Sage Kapila of immeasurable glory. You should not therefore offer them earthly* water, O wise prince! (17-18)

गड़ा हिमवती ज्येष्ठा दुहिता पुरुषर्षभ।

तस्यां कुरु महाबाहो पितृणां सलिलक्रियाम्।। 19  ॥

Gānga is the elder daughter of Himavān, the deity presiding over the Himalayas. Offer water, O mighty-armed prince, to the soul of your departed uncles in that river, O jewel among men! (19)

भस्मराशीकृतानेतान् प्लावयेल्लोकपावनी।

तया कित्तमिदं भस्म गझ्या लोककान्तया।

षीध्टे पुत्रसहस्राणि स्वर्गलोकं गमियन्ति ॥ 20  ॥

* There is a Smrti text running as under :

चाण्डालादुदकात् सर्पिं बैधुतद्ध ब्राह्माणादपि।

दंद्रिष्यक्ष घपृष्यक्ष मरणं घपाकर्शेगान्म।।

उदकं पिण्डद्वानं च न तेशं तु विधीयते।

“Death at the hands of a pariah or a Brāhmana or through being submerged in water, through snake-bite, through being struck by lightning or through being bitten by animals with fangs falls to the lot of men of sinful deeds alone. Offering water or lumps of cooked rice or uncooked flour etc., is not recommended for their peace in the other world.”

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

"When the Gaṅgā, which is capable of purifying the whole world, washes them, reduced as they are to heaps of ashes, this heap of ashes soaked by the Gaṅgā, a river pleasing to the world, will take the souls of the sixty thousand princes to the celestial plane. (20)

निर्फ्छाल्यं महाभाग संगृह्ध पुरुषर्षभ।

यज्ञे पैतामहं वीर निर्वर्तीयतुमहिंसि ॥ 21  ॥

"Taking the horse with you, O highly blessed one, depart from this region, O jewel among men! Thereby you ought to ensure the completion of your grandfather's sacrificial undertaking, O valiant prince!" (21)

सूपपाँवचनं श्रुत्वा सांउषुमानतिवीयंवान्।

त्वरितं हयमदाय पुनरायामहातपा: ॥ 22  ॥

Hearing the admonition of Garuda, the celebrated Amśuman, who was exceptionally powerful and a great ascetic too, speedily returned to his grandfather's capital taking the sacrificial horse with him. (22)

ततो राजनमासाद्य दीक्षितं रघुनन्दन।

न्यवेदयद् यथा वृतं सुपर्णवचनं तथा ॥ 23  ॥

Then seeking the presence of the king,

who stood consecrated for the sacrifice yet, O scion of Raghu, he related exactly what had happened as well as reproduced faithfully the utterance of Garuda. (23)

तच्छुला घोरसंकाशं वाक्यमंशुमते नृप: ।

यजं निर्वर्तेयामास यथाकल्पं यथाविधि || २४ ॥

Hearing that apparently awe-inspiring tale from the lips of Arñsumān, the king Sagara concluded the sacrifice to the best of his capacity in accordance with the scriptural ordinance. (24)

स्वपुरं लयामच्छीमानिष्टयजो महीपति:।

गड़ायाश्रममे राजा निश्रयं नाध्यमच्छत ॥ 25  ॥

Having performed the sacrifice the glorious emperor for his part returned to his capital. The monarch, however, could not hit upon any plan for ensuring the descent of the Ganga to the terrestrial plane. (25)

अगला निश्रयं राजा कालेन महता महान्।

त्रिशद्धपसंहसाधि राज्यं कृत्वा दिवं गतः ॥ 26  ॥

Failing to reach any conclusion in the aforesaid matter even after a considerable time and having reigned for thirty thousand years, the great king ascended to heaven.

(26)

इल्यार्थ श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे

एककत्वारिंश: सर्प: ॥ 41  ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-one in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmi, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.



द्विच्चारिशः सर्गैः

Canto XLII

Amśumān and his grandson, Bhagiratha, successively practise austerities for bringing down the Gangā to the terrestrial plane. Brahmā grants a boon to Bhagiratha and exhorts him to propitiate Lord Śiva and secure His consent to receive the Gangā on His head

कालधर्य माते राम सगरे प्रकृतीजना:।

राजानं रोच्यामासुरंशुमन्तं सुधार्थिमकम् ॥ 1  ॥

Sagara having met his end (which is the law of Time, according to which one who is born must die sooner or later when one has played one's allotted role), O Rāma, the people desired the highly pious Amśumān to be their ruler. (1)

स राजा सुमहानासीद्यूमान् रघुनन्दन ।

तस्य पुत्रो महानासीद् दिलीप इति विश्रुतः ॥ 2  ॥

The said Amśumān, O scion of Raghu, proved to be a great monarch. His son, widely known by the name of Dilipa, was equally great. (2)

तस्मै राज्यं समादिश्य दिलीपे रघुनन्दन ।

हिमविच्छखरे रथे तपसेसे सुदारणम् ॥ 3  ॥

Having entrusted the kingship to the said Dilipa, O scion of Raghu, Anísumān practised the severest form of askesis (for bringing down the Gangā to the terrestrial plane) on a delightful summit of the Himālayas. (3)

द्वारिश्छन्तसाहस्वे वर्षाणि सुमहायशना:।

तपोवनगतो राजा स्वर्ग लेधे तपोधन: ॥ 4  ॥

Having continued for thirty-two lakhs of years in a grove intended for austerities alone, the highly illustrious king, rich in asceticism, eventually attained heaven only and not the desired grace of the holy Gaṅga. (4)

दिलीपस्तु महातेजाः श्रुता पैतामहं वधम्।

दूःखोपहतया बुकूदा निश्रयं नाध्यमच्छत ॥ 5  ॥

Hearing of the unnatural death of this grand-uncles, the exceptionally glorious Dilipa could not arrive at any decision regarding the method of bringing the Gaṅgā down to the terrestrial plane due to his judgment being clouded by sorrow. (5)

कर्थ गड़ावतरणं कर्थ तेषां जलक्रिया।

तारयेयं कर्थ चैतानिति चिन्तापरो5भवत् ॥ 6  ॥

He felt anxious as to how the Gaṅgā should be made to descend to the terrestrial plane, how water could be offered to them and as to how he should be able to redeem their departed souls. (6)

तस्य चिन्तयती नित्यं धर्मेण विदितात्मन: ।

घुत्रो भगीरथो नाम ज़ेरे परमधार्यमिकः ॥ 7  ॥

While the king, who was celebrated for his righteousness, was thus plunged in thought every moment, a most pious son, Bhagiratha by name, was born to him. (7)

दितीपस्तु महातेना यजैवहृष्टिपरिष्टवान्।

त्रिश्रादृष्वेसह्वाणि राजा राज्यमकारयत् ॥ 8  ॥

Dilipa, for his part, who was exceptionally glorious, propitiated the Lord through many sacrifices. The king reigned for thirty thousand years. (8)

अगला निश्रयं राजा तेषामुद्रर्णं प्रति ।

व्याधिना नरशादूल कालधर्मपुर्यिवान् ॥ 9  ॥

Failing to arrive at any decision on the question of deliverance of his forbears, the king, O tiger among men, met his end, which is the law of Time, through illness. (9)

इत्रलोकं गतो राजा स्वाजिंतेनैव कर्मणा ।

राज्ये भागीरधं पूत्रमिभिषिच्य नरर्षभः ॥ 10  ॥

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

Having installed his son, Bhagiratha, on the throne, the king, who was a jewel among men, ascended to paradise, the realm of Indra, through merit earned by his own self. (10)

भगीरथस्तु राजर्षिधींमिको सूचनन्दन।

अनपत्यो महाराज: प्रजाकाम: स च प्रजा: ॥ 11  ॥

मन्थिष्याधाय तहान्यं गड़गवतर्णे रतः ।

तपो दीर्घं समातिछूद गोकर्णे रघुनन्दन ॥ 12  ॥

Emperor Bhagiratha, a pious royal sage, was issueless and as such desirous of progeny, O scion of Raghu ! Having entrusted the people as well as their rulership to his ministers, intent as he was on the descent of the Gānga to the terrestrial plane, he practised prolonged askesis on Mount Gokarna, a summit of the Himalayas, O delight of the Raghus ! (11-12)

ऊर्धविषहु: पछतपा मासाहारो जितेन्द्रियः।

तस्य वर्षसह्वाणि घोरे तपसि लिछत: ॥ 13  ॥

अत्तितानि महाबाहो तस्य राजो महात्मनः ।

सुप्रीतो भगवान् ब्रह्मा प्रजानां प्रभूरीक्षः ॥ 14  ॥

With uplifted arms and senses fully controlled he exposed himself to five fires (placing himself in the midst of four fires, one in each quarter with the fifth in the shape of the sun overhead) and partook of food only once a month. A thousand years elapsed even as he remained engaged in severe asceticism, O mighty-armed one! The almighty Brahmā, the creator, the lord and ruler of all created beings, got much pleased with that high-souled king. (13-14)

ततः सुरगणैः साध्यमुपागम्य पितामहः । भगीरथ महात्यानं तप्यमानमधाब्वती। 15 । ॥

Calling with hosts of gods on the high-souled Bhagiratha, who had been practising austerities, Brahma (the progenitor of the entire creation) thereupon forthwith spoke to him as follows: (15)

भगीरथ महाराज प्रीतसैर्धं जनाधिंध। तपसा च सुतमेन वरं वरय सूज़त। 16 । ॥

"I am pleased with the askesis duly practised by you, O great king, the ruler of people! Therefore, ask of me a boon of your choice, O king of noble vows!" (16)

तमुवाच महातेजा: सर्वलोकपितामहम्।

भगीरथो महाबाहु: कृताज्ञलिपुः: स्थित: ॥ 17 ॥

Standing with folded hands the exceptionally glorious and mighty-armed Bhagiratha submitted as follows to Brahmā, the progenitor of all the worlds: (17)

यदि मे भगवान् प्रीतो यद्यस्त तपसः फलम्।

सगरस्यात्मज्ञा: सर्वे मत: सलिलमाप्नुयु: ॥ 18  ॥

"If the lord is pleased with me and if there is any reward for asceticism, let all the sons of Sagara receive water from me. (18)

गड़ाया: सलिलकित्चे भस्मन्येभं महात्मानाम्।

त्वर्गं गछोयुर्यन्तं सर्वे च प्रपितामहा: ॥ 19  ॥

"When the ashes of these princes of gigantic body get soaked with the waters of the Gaṅgā, all my aforesaid grand-uncles bid fair to attain the everlasting heaven. (19)

देव याचे ह संतलै नावसीदेत् कुलं च नः ।

इक्ष्वाकृणां कुले देव एष मेउस्तु वर: परः ॥ 20  ॥

"Born in the line of Ikswāku, O glorious one, I ask for a male progeny so that our race may not get extinct. Let this be treated as another boon, O lord!" (20)

उक्तवास्वं तु राजानं सर्वलोकपितामहः ।

प्रत्युवाच शुभां वाणीं मधुरां मधुराक्षारामू ॥ 21  ॥

Brahmā, the progenitor of all the worlds, thereupon answered the king, who had uttered the aforesaid prayer, in the following benignant and agreeable speech, full of sweet expressions: (21)

मनोरथो महानेष भगीरथ महारथ।

एवं भवतु भई ते इंश्वाकुकुलवर्धन ॥ 22  ॥

“Great is this ambition of yours, O Bhagiratha, a great car-warrior as you are! May it be realized! May success attend on you, O promoter of Ikswāku’s race! (22)



इयं हैभवती ज्येष्ठा गूजा हिमवतः सुता।

तां वै धारयितुं राजन् हरस्तत्र नियुच्यताम् ॥ 23  ॥

"Here is the river Gaṅgā, the elder daughter of Himavān, the deity presiding over the Himalayas, which emanates from the Himalayas. Let Lord Śiva alone be invoked to support the Gaṅgā when it descends on earth, O king! (23)

गड़ाया: पतनं राजन् पृथिवी न सहिष्यत ।

तां वे धारयितुं राजन् नान्यं पश्यामि शूलिनः ॥ 24  ॥

"The earth, O monarch, will not be able

जूल्याँ श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे

दिचलावाशि: सर्ग: ॥ 42  ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-two in the Balakāṇḍa of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

त्रिचलारिश: सर्ग:

Canto XLIII

Pleased with the asceticism of Bhagiratha, Lord Śiva receives the Gaṅgā on His head and discharges it into Bindusarovara. Branching forth into seven streams it then accompanies Bhagiratha to Rasātala and liberates his forbears on the way

देवदेवे गते तस्मिन् सोउकृष्टायिनपीडितान्।

कृत्वा वसुमती राम वत्सरं समुपासत १ १ १

"When the celebrated Brahmā (the adored even of gods) had left, O Rāma, Bhagiratha waited upon Lord Śiva for a year remaining standing on the tip of one of his great toes stamped on the ground. (1)

अथ संवत्सरे पूर्णे सर्वलोकनमस्कृतः।

उभापति: पशुपती राजानभिमदमबर्ति।। 2 ।।

On a year being completed, Lord Śiva (the Spouse of Uma, who evidently appeared with Him), Protector of the Jiva (who has been likened to an animal because of its bondage), the adored of all the worlds, forthwith addressed the following words to the king: (2)

प्रीतस्तेड़ं नरश्रेष्ठ करिष्यामि तव प्रियम्।

शिरसा धारयिष्यामि शैलराजस्तामहम् ॥ 3  ॥

"I am pleased with you, O jewel among men, and shall do that which is pleasing to you. I shall receive the Gaṅgā, the daughter of Himavān, the king of mountains, on My head even as it descends on earth. (3)

ततो हैमवती ज्येधा सर्वलोकनमस्कृता।

तदा सातिमहद्रूपं कृत्वा वेगं च दुस्सहम् ॥ 4  ॥

आकाशप्रादपतद् राम शिवे शिवशिरास्युता ।

अचिन्तयच्च सा देती गज्ञा परमद्धधरा ॥ 5  ॥

विश्याध्यहं हि पातालं स्रोतासा गृह्धं शंकरम्।

तस्यावलोपं ज्ञाला कुब्द्रस्तु भगवान् हर: ॥ 6  ॥

तिरोपाबवितुं बुद्धि चक्रे जिनयनस्तदा ।

सा तत्सिम्प वर्तिता पुण्या पुण्ये रूत्रस्य मूर्धनि ॥ 7  ॥



हिमवर्तमि राम जटामणडलगढ़र।

सा कर्थचिम्हीं गन्तूं नाशक्रांद् वलमाश्रिता ॥ 8  ॥

Swelling into the form of a very mighty stream and acquiring a formidable force, the celebrated Gangā, the elder daughter of Himavān, the adored of all the worlds, thereupon descended forthwith, O Rāma, from the heavens (her reputed home) on the blessed head of Lord Śiva: so the tradition goes. Nay, the said Gangā, who is all-glorious and most difficult to sustain, thought within herself: “Wafting Lord Śankara alongwith my stream, I might as well enter Pātāla.” Enraged to perceive her arrogance, the three-eyed Lord Śankara (the Destroyer of the universe) for His part forthwith made up His mind to conceal her in the midst of His matted locks. Fallen on the holy head of Lord Rudra, thick with coils of matted hair and resembling the Himalayas, in its colossal size, O Rāma, that sacred river could in no way reach the earth even though it made every effort to do so. (4-8)

नैव सा निर्ममे लेभे जटामण्डलमन्ततः ।

तत्रेवाब्धभद् देवी संवल्सरगणन् बहूत्।। 9 ।।

Revolving in the coils of His matted locks it did not find an egress even on reaching their end; the divine stream continued to meander on His head alone for several rounds of years. (9)

तामपश्यत् पुनस्तत तपः परममाधितः ।

स तेन तोषितश्रासीदत्यन्तं रघुनन्दन।। 10 ।।

Bhagiratha saw it there and took to supreme asceticism once more. Lord Śiva felt extremely pleased with that, O scion of Raghu! (10)

विसवर्ज नतो गृह्नो हरो विस्परुः प्रति।

तस्यां विस्पुच्यमानायां सस स्रोतांसि जजीर।। 11 ।।

Thereupon Lord Śiva (the Destroyer of the universe) let fall the Ganga into the Bindusara, a lake in the region of the

Himālayas, attributed to Brahma. While the river was being released, it got split up into seven streams. (11)

हादिनी पावनी चैव नलिनी च तथेव च।

तिसः प्राचीं दिशं जम्पुर्गुः: शिवजला: शुभा: ११२॥

Of these, three blessed streams of the Gaṅgā, consisting of delightful waters, viz., Hladini, Pāvani and even so Nalini too, ran in an easterly direction. (12)

सुरब्धूश्रैव तीता च सिस्धूर्षेव महान्दी।

तिस्थौता दिशं जम्पु: प्रतीची तु सुभोदका: ॥ 13  ॥

Again, Sucaksu and Sitā and even so the great river Sindhu—these three, consisting of blessed waters, flowed in a westerly direction. (13)

सममी चान्यगत् तासां भगीरथरर्थ तदा।

भगीरथो प्री राजर्षिंद्व्ये सन्दनामरित्धतः ॥ 14  ॥

प्रायादग्रे महातेजा गृज्ञा ते चायनुज्ञन्त।

गगनाछ्छकरशिरस्ततो धरपिणमागता ॥ 15  ॥

Again, the seventh of them forthwith followed the chariot of Bhagiratha. Mounted on a beautiful chariot, the royal sage Bhagiratha too, invested with unique splendour, marched ahead and the Gangā, really speaking, followed him. In this way the holy river descended from the heavens to the head of Lord Śaṅkara and came down from there to the earth and thereby justified the appellation of “Tripathagā” or the river following a threefold path, enjoyed by it. (14-15)

असमपैत जलं तत्र तीव्रगवद्पुरस्कृतः।

मत्यकच्छपर्मश्रेष्ठ शिशुभ्रमागणैरतथा ११६ ॥

पतिब्र: पतितेश्वेव व्यरोचत वसुंधरा ।

ततो देवर्विभन्यर्वां श्वशसिद्वगगायताशा ११७ ॥

व्यतोकवणत ते तत्र गगनाद् गां गतां तदा ।

विमानैर्नगराकारैहैशैगजवैरतथा ॥ 18  ॥

पारित्ववगताश्रापि देवतासत्र विधिता: ।

तद्द्वुतमिंग लोके गुक्रावतरुतमम् ॥ 19  ॥

दिद्धश्वो देवगणा: समीयुरमितोजस: ।

सम्पतन्द्रः सुरगणैतेर्षा चाधरणजीया ॥ 20  ॥



<table><tr><td>श्रताद्व्यमिवाभाति गगर्न गततोयदम्।</td></tr><tr><td>श्रिंगुमारोरगगणैमाँनरिप च चझुलेः ॥ 21  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>विद्युद्विचि विश्वसैराकाशमभवत् तदा।</td></tr><tr><td>पाणडुर्ं: सलिलोत्यैडै: कौर्यमाणै: सहस्वध ॥ 22  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>श्रारदाभैरिवाकोर्ण गगर्न हंसस्म्पल्लः।</td></tr><tr><td>क्वचिद्ध दुततरं याति कुटिलं क्वचिद्धायतम् ॥ 23  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>बिनतं क्वचिद्धुद्धृतं क्वचिद्ध याति शनैः शनैः</td></tr><tr><td>सलिलेनेव सलिलं क्वचिद्धभ्राहतं पुनः ॥ 24  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>मुहुरूख्वपथं गला पपात वसुधां पुनः ।</td></tr><tr><td>तच्छंकराशिरोभटं भटं भूमितले पुनः ॥ 25  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>व्यरोचत तदा तोयं निर्मलं गतकल्यमम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>तत्रिपाणगम्भवांं वसुधातलवासिनः ॥ 26  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>भवाङ्गपिततं तोयं पवित्रमिति पस्यूगुः ।</td></tr><tr><td>शापात् प्रपतिता ये च गगनाद्व सवुधातलम् ॥ 27  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>कृत्वा तत्राभिपेकं ते बभूवुर्गतकल्मया : ।</td></tr><tr><td>धृतपापा: पुनस्नेत तोयेनाथ शुभाधित्वतः ॥ 28  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>पुर्नाकाशमाविश्य स्वोल्लोकान् प्रतिपदिरः ।</td></tr><tr><td>मुपुदे मुपितो लोकस्नेत तोयेन भास्वता ॥ 29  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>कृताधिषेको गृज्यां बभूव गतकल्मयः ।</td></tr><tr><td>भगीरथो हि राजर्शिंद्व्ये स्वन्दनामश्रितः ॥ 30  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>प्रायादये महाराजसर्न गृज्ञ पृष्ठतो5वगात्।</td></tr><tr><td>देवा: सर्भिगणा: सर्वे दैत्यदानवराश्रसः ॥ 31  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>गन्धवैयक्षप्रवरा: सर्किनरमहोरगा: ।</td></tr><tr><td>सप्तैश्रापसरसो राम भगीरश्रथानुगा: ॥ 32  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>गृज्मन्यगमन् प्रीता: सर्वे जलचराश्र ये ।</td></tr><tr><td>यतो भगीरशो राजा ततो गृत्रा यशप्रिकिति ॥ 33  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>जगगम सरितां श्रेष्ठा सर्वेपापणगणिश्नीः ।</td></tr><tr><td>ततो हि यजमाननस्य जह्मोरद्धृतकर्मण: ॥ 34  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>गृज्ञे सम्प्लावयामास यज्ञवाटं महात्मनः ।</td></tr><tr><td>तस्यावलपेनं जात्वा कुछ्जो जहुई राघच ॥ 35  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>अपिबत् तु जलं सर्वे गृज्ञायः परमाब्दुतम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>ततो देवा: सन्ध्यर्वां ऋषयश्र सुविधिस्ता: ॥ 36  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>पूजयति महात्मानं जहुं पुरुषवस्तामम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>गृज्ञं चापि नयिति सम दुहितृत्वे महात्मानः ॥ 37  ॥</td></tr></table>

There on the earth's surface the water of the Gangā meandered with a terrific noise. And the earth looked exceptionally charming with its hosts of fishes and tortoises as well as with its multitudes of sea-elephants falling and already fallen alongwith the stream on

the earth's surface. At that time, seized with great bewilderment those celestial Rsis and Gandharvas as well as the hosts of Yakṣas and Siddhas, and the gods stationed there (in the heavens) beheld from their aerial cars, big as cities, as well as from the back of their horses and excellent elephants the Gaṅga's descent on the earth from the said heavens. Eager to see this celebrated, nay, wonderful and superb descent of the Gaṅga on the mortal plane, multitudes of gods possessed of infinite strength collected in the heavens. With the hosts of gods coming down with great speed and with the brilliance of their shining jewels, the cloudless firmament looked as if irradiated by hundreds of suns. Scattered on that occasion with multitudes of sea-elephants and snakes as well as with throbbing fishes, the sky appeared covered with streaks of lightning. Nay, with volumes of white foam that were being tossed about in numberless particles the vault of heavens looked as if overcast with autumnal waterless and hence white clouds and crowded with flocks of flying swans.

The Ganga now flowed very swiftly, now tortuously; now it broadened out and now again narrowed down when forcing its way through a ravine; now it was tossed high when dashed against a rock and now it glided. Now buffeted by the waves of the same water indeed (when turned back by the wind), the water of the Ganga's spouted upwards once more and dashed to the ground again. First fallen on the head of Lord Saṅkara and again dropped on the earth's surface, the limpid water of the Ganga, which rids those who come in contact with it of all sin, shone bright on that occasion. On that spot hosts of Rsis and Gandharvas as well as the inhabitants of the globe touched (sipped) the water fallen from the person of Lord Śiva (the Source of the universe) as purifying. Those who had fallen from the heavens to the

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

terrestrial plane through a curse were rid of their sin (responsible for the curse) by bathing in it. Having been rid of their sin through the very touch of that water and further invested with merit, they ascended once more to the heavens and returned to their respective realms. Already delighted with the very sight of that sparkling water and rid of their sin by having bathed in the Ganga, people rejoiced all the more.

Mounted on a charming chariot, Emperor Bhagiratha, the royal sage, drove ahead, while the Ganga followed at his heels. Full of delight all gods including hosts of Rsis, as well as Daityas, Dānavas and ogres, the foremost among Gandharvas and Yaksas, including Kinnaras and great Nagas, as well as serpents and celestial nymphs, as also all species of aquatic creatures that existed followed the Gangā, keeping behind Bhagiratha's chariot. The illustrious Gangā, the foremost of all rivers, which is capable of eradicating all sins, followed in whatever direction Bhagiratha drove. Proceeding from there, it is said, the Gangā actually inundated the sacrificial ground of the high-souled sage Jahnu, the worker of miracles, who had been performing a sacrifice. Jahnu felt enraged to perceive the pride of Gangā, O scion of Raghu, and drank up by dint of his yogic power all the water of the Gangā, which was a supreme miracle indeed. Highly astonished, the gods including the Gandharvas and Rsis thereupon glorified the high-souled Jahnu, the foremost among men, and reduced the Gangā to the position of a daughter of that exalted soul

by prevailing upon him to eject the Ganga.

(16-37)

ततस्तुचे महातेजा: श्रोत्राथयामुजत् प्रधु: ।

तस्माजदुपुता गङ्ग प्रोच्यते जाङ्वोति च ॥ 38  ॥

Pleased at that, the powerful sage, invested as he was with exceptional glory, discharged the Gangā through his ears. Hence the Gangā is spoken of as a daughter of Jahnu and called by the name of Jāhnavi (descended from Jahnu). (38)

जगाम च पुनर्गझा भगीराधशानुगा ।

सागरं चापि सम्भासा सा सरित्यवरा तदा ॥ 39  ॥

सातलमुपागछ्त् सिद्ध्रर्थं तस्य कर्मेण: ।

भगीरथो3पि राजर्षिभूबामादय यतन्तः ॥ 40  ॥

पितामहान् भस्मकृतापश्यद् गतचेतनः ।

अथ तद्धस्मनां राशिं गझ्ञासिललमुतनम् ।

लावयत् पुतपाथानः खर्गे प्राता रघृतम ॥ 41  ॥

The Gāngā once more followed in the wake of Bhagiratha's chariot and duly reached the excavation made by Sagara's sons and filled it*. Then that foremost of rivers forced its way into Rasātala (the penultimate subterranean region) for consummating the feat of Bhagiratha, viz., the deliverance of his departed forbears. Leading the Gāngā with superhuman effort to Rasātala as aforesaid, the royal sage Bhagiratha too beheld his great grand-uncles reduced to ashes and fainted (as it were partly from grief and partly from exhaustion). The most sacred water of the Gāngā forthwith submerged the heaps of their ashes and, purged of their sin, the souls of Sagara's departed sons ascended to heaven, O jewel among the Raghus! (39-41)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वात्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे

त्रिच्चालरिंश: सर्ग: 11 ४३ ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-three in the Bálakāndā of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

[Unreadable]

* The water turned brackish only when it was later drunk up and discharged by the sage Agastya.



चतुश्वातरिंश: सर्ग:

Canto XLIV

Applauding Bhagiratha, Brahmā urges him to gratify the souls of his departed great grand-uncles by offering them the water of the Gaṅgā, and after doing his bidding, Bhagiratha returns to his capital; the glory of hearing and reading the story of Gaṅgā's descent on earth

स गत्वा सागरं राजा गड़्यानुगतस्तदा।

प्रविवेश तलं भूमेवैत्र ते भयसमात्कृता: ॥ 1  ॥

Reaching the excavation made by Sagara's sons, followed by the Gaṅgā, the king Bhagiratha then entered the lowest stratum of the bowels of the earth, where his great grand-uncles lay reduced to ashes. (1)

भयस्याधाणतुते राम गृहाया: सलिलेन वै।

सर्वलोकप्रभुर्ज्ञा राजानमिदमब्रलिति.। 2  ॥

When their ashes had been thoroughly washed by the water of the Gaṅgā, Brahmā, the overlord of the whole universe, called on and spoke to the king as follows: (2)

तारिता नरशाष्टून दिवं याताश्र इवेवल्।

षधि: पुरसह्श्वाणि सगरस्य महात्मन: ॥ 3  ॥

“The sixty thousand sons of the high-

souled Sagara have all been delivered from

damnation, O tiger among men, and have

ascended to heaven like gods. (3)

सागरस्य जलं लोके यावत् स्थास्यति पार्थिव।

सगरस्यात्मजा: सर्वे दिवि स्थास्यति देववत्।। 4  ॥

"Like the very gods all the sons of Sagara will abide in heaven so long as the water of the ocean continues to exist on earth, O prince! (4)

इयं च दुर्हिता ज्येष्ठा तव गुक्ता भविष्यति।

त्वलुकेतन च नाप्राथ लोके स्थायति विश्रुता ॥ 5  ॥

"Nay, this Gāngā will be your eldest daughter and will now be widely known in the world by the name Bhāgirathi, derived from you. (5)

गड़ा प्रियथा नाम दिव्या भागीरथीति च।

श्रीन् पथो भाववनीति तस्मात् प्रियथा स्मृता ॥ 6  ॥

"The Gaṅgā will also be called Tripathagā, following a threefold path, Divyā (a heavenly stream) and Bhāgirathi (daughter of Bhagiratha). Because it carves its way through the three spheres, viz., heaven, earth and the subterranean region, hence it is designated as ‘Tripathagā’. (6)

पितामहानां सर्वैघां लवमत्र मनुजाधिप।

कुरुभ्व सलिलं राजन् प्रतिज्ञामपवजैय। 7 9  ॥

"Offer water here on the bank of the Gaṅgā to all your great grand-uncles, O ruler of men, and implement the vow undertaken by your forefathers and yourself, viz., of redeeming the sons of Sagara by offering them the water of the Gaṅgā, O king! (7)

पूर्वेकेन घि हे ते राजसंतनातिवशया तदा।

धार्मिणां प्रवेरणाथ नैष प्रातो मनोरध्य: ॥ 8  ॥

"This ambition of bringing down the Gaṅgā to the mortal plane was not at all realized in those days by that celebrated ancestor of yours, viz., Sagara, who enjoyed exceptional glory and was the foremost of pious souls. (8)

तथैवांश्यमता वस्त्र लोके प्रधात्मतेजसा ।

गङ्गं प्रार्थयन्ता नेतुं प्रतिज्ञा नापवर्जिता ॥ 1  ॥

राजर्षिणा गुणवता महर्षिसमतेजसा ।

मन्त्यवपसा चैव क्रशप्रभमित्यतेन च। 10  ॥

"Even so, the vow could not be redeemed, O dear child, even by the royal sage Arñsúmān, who was invested with a

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

glory which had no parallel in the world, nay, who longed to bring the Gaṅgā down to the earth, was full of excellences, possessed a splendour resembling that of great Rṣis, was my equal in asceticism and devoted to the duties of a Kṣatriya. (9-10)

दिलीपेन महाभाग तव पियातितेजसा।

पुर्नं शक्तिता नेतु गड़ा प्रार्थयतानच॥ 11  ॥

"The Gaṅgā could not be brought down to the terrestrial plane, O highly blessed one, even by your exceedingly glorious father, Dilipa, much though he implored her to that effect, O sinless prince! (11)

सा त्वया समतिकाना प्रतिज्ञा पुरुषर्षभ।

प्रासोसि परमं लोके यश: परमस्ममतम् ॥ 12  ॥

"That vow has been implemented by you, O jewel among men, and you have in consequence attained the highest glory, solicited even by the greatest in the world. (12)

तच्छ गड़ावतरणं त्वया कृतमरिद्धम।

अनेन च भवान् प्रासो धर्मस्यायतं महत् ॥ 13  ॥

"The celebrated achievement in the shape of bringing down the Gaṅgā to the terrestrial plane has been accomplished by you, O subduer of foes! and by this you have attained the great reward of virtue in the shape of the realm of Brahmā. (13)

ल्लावयस्व ल्यामतानं नरोतम सदोषिते।

सलिले पुरुषश्रेष्ठ शुचि: पुण्यफलो भव ॥ 14  ॥

"Even though pure, bathe yourself, O jewel among men, in the water of the holy Gaṅga, which is fit for bath all the year round (unlike other rivers which are rendered unfit for bath during the monsoons) and attain the reward of your merit, O superman! (14)

पितामहानां सर्वेषां कुरुष्व सलिलक्रियम्।

स्वस्ति तेजस्तु गमिष्यामि स्व लोकं गयन्तां नृप ॥ 15  ॥

"Offer water to all your great grand-uncles, may all be well with you. I shall now go back to my realm, you may also return

to your own capital, O protector of men!" (15)

इत्येवमुक्ला देवेश: सर्वलोकपितामह:।

यथाउउगत तथागच्छद् देवलोकं महायशा: ॥ 16  ॥

(Víśwāmitra continues) “Saying so, the highly glorious Brahmā (the progenitor of all the worlds), the overlord of gods, ascended to the realm of gods even as he had come.(16)

भगीरथस्तु राजर्षि: कृत्वा सलिलमुतनम्।

यथाक्रमं यथान्ययं सारागरणां महायशा: ॥ 17  ॥

कृतोदक: शुची राजा स्वपुरं प्रविवेश हं ।

समूढ्राध्यों नरश्रेष्ठ स्वारान्यं प्रशशास हं ॥ 18  ॥

"Having offered the best water to Sagara's sons in order of seniority and according to the scriptural ordinance, and having similarly gratified his other forbears too and getting purified thereby, the exceptionally glorious Bhagiratha, a seer among kings, for his part returned to his capital: so the tradition goes. His aim having been realized thereby, he ruled over his kingdom, O jewel among men! (17-18)

प्रमुंदि च लोकस्तं नृपमासाद्य राघव।

नष्टशोक: समुद्धार्यं बधूव विनतान्चर: ॥ 19  ॥

"The people greatly rejoiced to get him—their king—once more, O scion of Raghu! With their grief, caused by separation from him, dispelled, they felt accomplished of purpose and found their anxiety gone. (19)

एष ते राम गढ़ाया विस्तारोर्पभिहितो मया।

स्वस्ति प्राणहुि भई ते संध्याकालोउतिवतते ॥ 20  ॥

"In this way, O Rāma, the story of the descent of the Gaṅgā has been narrated to you at length by me. Attain blessedness as a reward of hearing it, may prosperity attend you! The hour of Sandhyā prayers is slipping past. (20)

धन्यं यशस्यमायुचं पुच्यं स्वर्यमेधापि च।

यः. शावयति विशेषु क्षत्रियेधितरेषु च।। 11 ॥

प्रीयन्ते पितरस्तस्य प्रीयन्ते दैवतानि च।

इदमाख्यानमायुचं गड़्ज्वतरणं शुभम्।। 22 ॥

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

य: श्रणोति च काकुत्स्थ सर्वान् कामानवान्यात्।

सर्वे पाया: प्रणश्यन्ति आयु: कीर्तिश्र वर्थते ॥ 23  ॥

The departed forbears of the man who narrates to the Brāhmanas, the Kṣatriyas and others this story—which fetches wealth and renown, is conducive to longevity and ensures the birth of a male issue and also

residence in heaven—feel gratified and gods too get propitiated thereby. He who listens, O scion of Kakutstha, to this blessed story of the descent of the Gaṅgā to the mortal plane, which is conducive to longevity, bids fair to attain all his desired objects. All his sins totally disappear and the span of his life as well as his fame extends." (21-23)

इत्यार्ते श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकागड़े चतुर्भत्यार्सि: सर्ग: ॥ 44  ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-four in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

पञ्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग:

Canto XLV

Viswāmitra tells Śri Rāma how in the remote past the gods and the demons conjointly churned the ocean of milk, using Mount Mandara as the churning rod, how Lord Śiva drank off the deadly poison skimmed out of it, how as a result of that churning appeared Lord Dhanvantari, a bevy of Apsarās, the beverage known by the name of Varuni, the horse Uccaishrāva, the Kaustubha gem and nectar, and how the conflict of gods and the Daityas ended in the destruction of the latter

विश्वामित्रवचः श्रुता राघवः सहलक्ष्मणः।

विस्मयं परमं गला विश्वामिमश्राब्रवोत् ॥ 1  ॥

Struck with great wonder to hear the speech of Viśwāmitra, Śri Rāma (a scion of Emperor Raghu) alongwith Lakṣmana forth-with spoke to Viśwāmitra as follows: (1)

अत्यद्धुतमिदं ब्रह्न् कथितं परमं स्वाय। गृत्रवतरणं पुण्यं सागरस्यापि पूर्णम्। 2 ।१

“Most wonderful, O holy Brahmana, is this charming and sacred story, told by you, of the descent of the Ganga to the terrestrial plane as well as of how the excavation made by the sons of Sagara came to be filled by it. (2)

क्षणभूतिव नौ रात्रि: संवृत्तेयं परंतय।

इमां चित्तयतीः सर्वा निश्रिलेन कक्षां तत् १३ ॥

"This night has slipped past us, the two brothers, like an instant, O tormentor of internal enemies in the shape of lust, anger and so on, even as we pondered on your entire story in detail. (3)

तस्य सा शर्करी सर्वां मम सौमित्रिणा सह ।

जगामा चित्तयानस्य विश्वासित्र कक्षां शृभाम् ॥ 4  ॥

"The whole night, O friend of the universe, slipped past me as well as Lakṣmana (the son of Sumitra) as I pondered with him the charming story." (4)

ततः प्रभाते विमले विश्वामित्र तपोधनम्।

उवाच राघवो वाक्यं कृताहिकमरिदमः ॥ 5  ॥

Then, on the day having clearly dawned, Śrī Rāma, a scion of Emperor Raghu, the subduer of his enemy, submitted as follows



to Viśwāmitra, whose only wealth was his asceticism and who had just finished his daily routine of devotions: (5)

भता भगवती रासि: श्रोतल्यं परमं श्रुतम्।

तताम सरितां श्रेष्ठां पुर्णयं विषयगां नदीम् ॥ 6  ॥

"The sacred night hallowed by the narration of the story of Ganga's descent has passed. That which was most worthy of hearing has been heard. Now let us cross the holy river Ganga (which follows a three-fold course, the foremost of all rivers. (6)

नौरेया हि सुखातसीणां ऋषीणां पुणवकर्मणाम्।

भगवतमिह प्रासं जात्वा त्वरितमागता ॥ 9  ॥

"Here indeed is a boat furnished with an agreeable matting to sit on and sent by Rşis of meritorious deeds, which has expeditiously appeared on coming to know of Your Holiness having arrived here." (7)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा राघवस्य महात्मन: ।

संततं कारयामास सर्पिसंघस्य कॉशिकः ॥   ॥ ॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of the celebrated and high-souled Śrī Rāma, a scion of Emperor Raghu, Viswāmitra (a scion of King Kuśa) caused Śrī Rāma alongwith Laksmana and the whole host of seers accompanying the sage, including himself, to be ferried across the river. (8)

उत्तर तीरमासाठ सम्यूर्धिंगणं ततः ।

गड़कृल्पे निविष्टासते विशालांं ददृषु: पुरीम् ॥ 9  ॥

Then, having reached the opposite bank of the Gargā and duly greeted the host of Rṣis waiting there to receive the distinguished party, they (Viśwāmitra and his followers) saw the city of Viśalā in the distance while seated on the bank of the Gargā. (9)

ततो मुनिवसरूपर्ग जगाम सहाधवः ।

विशालां नगरिं रथां दिव्यां स्वर्योपमां तदा ॥ 10  ॥

Accompanied by the two scions of Raghu, Viśwāmitra, the foremost of hermits,

then hastily proceeded from that place to the delightful and heavenly city of Viśāla, which vied with paradise. (10)

अथ रागो महाप्राजो विश्वामित्र महापुर्निम्।

पपछ्छ प्राज्ञलिभूला विशालामुत्तमो पुरीम् ॥ 1  ॥

With folded-hands, as a mark of respect, the exceptionally wise Śrī Rāma, forthwith made the following inquiries of the eminent sage, Viśwamitra, concerning the foremost city of Viśalā : (11)

कतमो राजवंशोयं विशालायां महामुने।

श्रोतुमिच्छामि भई ते परं कोतृतूलं हि मे ॥ 12  ॥

"I wish to hear, O great sage, what celebrated dynasty of kings is ruling at present in Visāla; for great is my curiosity in this behalf. God bless you!"

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुता रामस्य मृनिपुंगवः।

आख्यातुं तत् समारोभे विशालायाः पुरातनम् ॥ 13  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid request of Śri Rāma, Viśwāmitra, a jewel among sages, proceeded to relate in the following words a well-known old legend relating to the foundation of Viśāla. (13)

श्रयतां राम शक्रस्य कर्थां कथयतः श्रुताम्।

अस्मिन् देशे हि यद वृजां शृणु तत्वेन रावये ॥ 14  ॥

"Hear, from me, O Rāma, even as I narrate it, the story of Indra, throwing light on the glory of Viśāla, as heard by me. Hear, O scion of Raghu, in reality what actually happened in this region. (14)

पूर्व कृत्यगे राम दिते: पुत्रा महावलाः।

अदितेश्र महाभागा वीयवन्तः सुधार्थिमका: ॥ 15  ॥

"In a Satyayuga of old, very mighty sons were born of Diti and highly blessed ones of Aditi, who were powerful and exceptionally pious. (15)

ततसेर्षा नर्याप्र बुद्धिरासीमहात्मानाम्।

अमरा विजराश्रैव कर्थ स्यामो निरामयाः ॥ 16  ॥

"In course of time even as they grew up, O tiger among men, the following

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

thought haunted those high-souled beings : "How can we possibly be immortal, immune from old age and proof against malady?" (16)

तेषां चिन्तयांत तत्र बुद्धिरासीद् विषधिताम्।

क्षीरोदमथनं कृत्वा रसं प्राप्यमात्र तत्र वै ॥ 17  ॥

“Even as they reflected, an idea occurred to them at the moment, intelligent as they were: ‘Churning the ocean of milk we can surely obtain the immortalizing drink from it.’” (17)

ततो निश्रिय मथनं योकसं कृत्वाच वासुरुकिम्।

मन्थानं मदरं कृत्वा ममन्धूरमितोजसः ॥ 18  ॥

“Making up their mind to churn the ocean and using Vāsuki (the king of serpents) as a cord and turning Mount Mandara into a churning rod, the gods as well as the demons, who were possessed of infinite strength, then started churning the ocean. (18)

अथ वर्षेसहोप योक्वसमर्पीशरांसि च।

वमन्तो5तिवर्ष तत्र ददंशुदंशनैः शिला: ॥ 19  ॥

"Now after a thousand years the heads of the serpent that was being used as a cord began to bite the rocks forming part of Mount Mandara with their fangs, throwing up copious venom. (19)

उत्पवातार्निसंकारों हालाहलमहाविषयम्।

तेन दर्श्यं जगत् सर्वे सदेवासुरमानुष्यम्। 20  ॥

"As a result of the churning there appeared on the surface of the ocean all of a sudden a deadly poison bearing the name of 'Halāhala'. The whole universe comprising gods, demons and human beings began to be consumed by it. (20)

अथ देवा महादेवे शंकरं शरणाधिनः।

जम्य: पशुपति हरं जाहि राहीति तुष्टुः ॥ 21  ॥

"The gods thereupon mentally sought the great Divinity, Rudra, the Deity presiding over destruction, the Protector of the embodied spirit (that has been likened to a beast because of its bondage), seeking

protection with Him, and glorified Him, saying 'Save us! Protect us !!' (21)

परमुक्तसतो देवेदैवदेवेश्वः प्रभु: ।

प्रादुरासीत् ततोउत्रैव शड्यखचक्षयो हरि: ॥ 22  ॥

"Addressed thus by the gods, Lord Śiva, the Controller even of the rulers of gods, forthwith appeared on the spot, and immediately thereafter appeared on that very spot Lord Śri Viṣnu, wielding a conch and a discus. (22)

उवाचैन सितं कृता रूत्रं शूलधरं हरि: ।

दैवतैमंध्यमाने तु यत् पूर्वं समुपस्थितम् ॥ 23  ॥

तत् लदीयं सुरश्रेष्ठ सुराणामयाते हिं यत् ।

अगपूजामिह स्थिता गृहाणेदं विष प्रभो ॥ 24  ॥

“Śri Hari spoke smiling as follows to the aforesaid Lord Rudra, the Wielder of a trident: ‘That which has appeared in the very first instance on the ocean being churned by the gods, conjointly with the demons, is really speaking Your share, O Jewel among gods, since it is You that take the lead among gods. Therefore, standing here, O almighty Lord, accept this poison as the tribute offered in precedence over others.’ (23-24)

इत्युक्ता च सुरप्रीष्ठसर्वैवान्तरधीयत ।

देवतानां भयं दुहा श्रुला वाक्यं तु शार्डिंण: ॥ 25  ॥

हालाहलं विषं घोरं संजग्राहामुतोपमम् ।

देवान् विसूभ्य देवेशो जगाम भगवान् हर: ॥ 26  ॥

“Nay, saying so, Lord Viṣṇu, the foremost among gods, went out of sight on that very spot. Perceiving the fright of the gods and listening to the exhortation of Lord Viṣṇu (the Wielder of a bow made of horn), Lord Śiva (the Destroyer of the universe), the Ruler of gods, for His part swallowed and treasured up in His throat the deadly poison named Hālāhala as though it were nectar, and, leaving the gods, departed to His own realm. (25-26)

ततो देवासुरा: सर्वे ममन्थू रघुनन्दन।

प्रविशेशथ पातालं मन्थान: पर्वतोत्तमः ॥ 21  ॥



"Thereupon the gods as well as the demons all proceeded once more to churn the ocean of milk, O delighter of the Raghus, and immediately Mount Mandara, the foremost of mountains, that served as their churning-rod, sank into Pátala, the lowest of the subterranean regions. (27)

ततो देवा: सगाध्वांस्तुष्टवुमंध्युसदून।

त्वं गति: सर्वभृतानां विशेषेण दिवौकसम् ॥ 28  ॥

"Then the gods including the Gandharvas extolled as follows Lord Viṣnu, the Destroyer of the demon Madhu : 'You are the resort of all created beings, particularly of gods, the denizens of heaven. (28)

पालयास्मान् महाबाहो गिरिमुद्धतुर्महसि।

इति श्रुला हबीकेश: कामठं रूपमास्थितः ॥ 29  ॥

पर्वतं पृष्ठतः कृत्वा शिश्ये तत्रोदधी हरि: ।

पर्वतायां तु लोकात्मा हस्तेनाकध्य केशः ॥ 30  ॥

देवानां मध्यतः स्थिता ममन्थ पुरुषोत्तमः ।

अथ वर्षसहंरण आयुवेदमयः पुमान् ॥ 31  ॥

उदरिष्ठत् सुधर्मात्मा सदण्डः सकमण्डलुः ।

पूर्वं धवन्तरिनां अपसराश्र सुवर्चसः ॥ 32  ॥

'Protect us, O mighty-armed one, and be pleased to lift up the mountain from the depths of Pátala.' Hearing this, Lord Viṣṇu, the Ruler of the senses of all, assumed the form of the divine Tortoise and, supporting the mountain on His back, lay down at the bottom of that ocean. Nay, holding fast with one hand the top of the mountain, and taking up His position in the midst of the gods, Lord Śri Hari (the Ruler even of Brahmā and Lord Śiva), the Supreme Person and the Soul of the universe, took part in the churning. Then after a thousand years emerged with a staff and a Kamandalu in hand first of all a male personage, Dhanvantari by name, the very embodiment of Āyurveda, the science of medicine, whose mind was given to extreme piety and then a bevy of celestial nymphs possessed of great splendour. (29-32)

अस्पू निर्मेधनादेव रसात् तस्माद् वरस्वतः। उनैतुर्मनुजश्रष्ट तस्मादप्रसरो३भवन्।। 33  ॥

“From the very cream (रस) produced as a result of that famous churning done in the water (or ‘स्’ in the form of milk of that ocean) emerged those excellent damsels, O Jewel among men; therefore they became known as the Apsarās. (33)

ष्रिष्ट: कोट्यो3भवंतसामप्रसरणां सुवर्चैसाम्।

असंख्येयासु काकुत्थ यासतासां परिचारिका: ॥ 34  ॥

“Six hundred million was the number of those exceptionally effulgent nymphs; while those who served as their female attendants were innumerable, O scion of Kakuttha! (34)

न ता: स्म प्रतिगृह्न्ति सर्वे ते देवदानावा:।

अप्रतिगृह्नगादेव ता वै साधारणा: स्मृता: ॥ 35  ॥

"All those gods and demons refused to accept them as wife. Due to their non-acceptance alone they came to be known as public women. (35)

वक्णस्य ततः कन्या वाक्णी रघुनन्दन।

उत्पयात महाधाभाग मार्मीमाणा परिश्रहम्॥ 36  ॥

"Then emerged from the ocean of milk, O scion of Raghu, the highly blessed Varunī (the deity presiding over spirituous liquor), a daughter of Varuna (the god presiding over the waters), seeking for a husband. (36)

दिते: पुरा न तां राम जगुबैकृणात्मवजाम्।

अदितेस्तु सुता वीर जगुबुस्तमानिद्धितम् ॥ 37  ॥

"The demons (sons of Diti), O Rāma, did not take to wife the said Varunī; but the gods, the sons of Aditi, O valiant one, accepted her, irreproachable as she was. (37)

असुरातेन देतेयाः सुरातेनादितेः सुता:।

हृद्यः प्रमुदिताशासन् वाकणग्राहणात् सुरा: ॥ 38  ॥

"For that reason the sons of Diti came to be known as Asuras (those who did not accept Surā or wine), while for the same

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYÄNA *

reason Aditi's sons became known as Suras (those who take wine). The gods felt thrilled and overjoyed due to their acceptance of Varuni. (38)

उन्हें: श्रवा हयश्रेष्ठो मणिरलं च कौस्तुभम्।

उदतिछत्रश्रेष्ठ तथैवामृतमुत्तमम् ॥ 39  ॥

"Next emerged, O jewel among men, Uccaihsravā, the foremost of all horses; Kaustubha, the most valuable of all gems, and, even, so nectar, the excellent drink.(39)

अथ तस्य कृते राम महानासीत् कुलक्षयः।

अदितस्तु ततः पुरा दितिपुराणयोधयम् ॥ 20  ॥

"Now over nectar there ensued a colossal destruction of the two races, gods and demons. On that occasion the sons of Aditi actually fought with the sons of Diti. (40)

एकतामयान् सर्वे असुरा राक्षसैः सह।

युद्धमासीमहाधोरे वीर जैलोक्यमोहनम् ॥ 41  ॥

"All demons got united with ogres. The result was a most deadly conflict, that bewildered all the three worlds (heaven, earth and the space intervening them), O valiant Rāma! (41)

यदा क्षयं गतं सर्व तदा विद्युमंहाबल: । अमृतं सौड़रत् तूर्णं मायामास्थाय मोहिनीम् ॥ 42  ॥

"When the whole host of the gods and the demons approached destruction, the exceptionally mighty Lord Viṣnu then hastily carried away the nectar, exhibiting His deluding potency in the form of a charming damsel. (42)

ये गताधिमुखं विद्युमक्षं पुरुभोत्तमम्।

समिष्टास्ते तदा युद्धे विद्युना प्रभविद्युना ॥ 43  ॥

"Those who opposed the immortal Lord Viṣnu, the Supreme Person, on that occasion were completely crushed in an encounter by the almighty Viṣnu. (43)

अदितरात्मजा वीरा दिते: पुगान् निजधिरे।

अस्मिन् घोरे महायुद्धे दैतेयादित्ययोग्धुगम् ॥ 44  ॥

"In this terrible major conflict between the sons of Diti and those of Aditi the heroic sons of Aditi completely destroyed the sons of Diti. (44)

निहत्य दितिपुत्रांस्तु राज्यं प्राय्य पुरंदरः ।

शशास मुदितो लोकान् सार्थिसंघान् सचारणान् ॥ 45  ॥

"Having destroyed the sons of Diti and attained sovereignty, Indra (the destroyer of strongholds) felt delighted and ruled the three worlds including the hosts of Rşis and the Čaranas, celestial bards." (45)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वात्मीकांये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे

पश्चत्वारिंश: सर्ग: ॥ 45  ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-five in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.



भट्ट्रत्वारिंश: सर्गे:

Canto XLVI

Disconsolate over the death of her sons, Diti embarks on a course of austerities at Kuśaplava with the permission of her husband, Sage Kaśyapa, with the object of securing a son capable of killing Indra. The latter on coming to know of her intention serves her during the period of her consecration and, taking advantage of her falling asleep on one occasion with her head in a wrong position, and thereby transgressing the rules of purity, enters her womb and carves the foetus

हतेषु तेषु पुरेषु दितिः परमदु:खिता।

मारीचं कश्यपं नाम भर्तारिमदमब्रवीत्॥ 1  ॥

Sore afflicted on her aforesaid sons having been killed in the course of their conflict with the sons of Aditi, Diti addressed her husband, named Kaśyapa, son of Marici, as follows: (1)

हतपुत्रासि भगवंसत्व पुरैमंहावलै: ।

शक्रहन्तारमिच्छामि पुत्र दीर्घतपोर्जितम् ॥ 2  ॥

"I have been deprived of my sons, O venerable sage, by your very mighty sons, the gods. Now I long for a son, secured, of course, through prolonged askesis, that may be able to kill Indra, the destroyer of my sons. (2)

साहं तपश्रिष्यामि गर्भं मे दातुमहींसि ।

ईश्रं शक्रहन्तारं त्वमनुजातुमहींसि ॥ 3  ॥

"As such I shall practise austerities. Be pleased, therefore, to favour me with a powerful son capable of killing Indra. You ought to grant me leave." (3)

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुला मारीचः कश्यपस्तदा ।

प्रत्युवाच महातेजा दितिं परमदुःश्रितात्म ॥ 4  ॥

Hearing her aforesaid submission, the exceptionally glorious Kásáyapa, son of Marici, replied as follows to Diti, sore afflicted as she was : (4)

एवं भवतु भर्ते ते शृत्रिभंव तपोधेने।

जनयिश्वसि पुरं त्वं शक्रह्नतारमाहते ॥ 5  ॥

"Let it be so. May all be well with you! Observe purity till the birth of a son, O lady rich in askses! In the ripeness of time you will give birth to a son who should be able to kill Indra in an encounter. (5)

पूर्णे वर्षमहसे तु शृष्चर्यदि भविष्यसि।

पुत्रे गैलेक्यहन्तारं मतस्त्वं जनयिष्यसि ॥ 6  ॥

"At the end of full one thousand years, provided of course you maintain purity, you will bring forth through me a son capable of killing Indra (the ruler of the three worlds)." (6)

एवमुक्ल्वा महातेजाः पाणिगा सम्ममार्जे तान्।

तामालन्य ततः स्वस्ति इत्कुक्वा तपसे ययो ॥ 7  ॥

Saying so, the highly glorious sage stroked her with his hand and then, touching her person and pronouncing his benediction on her, set out to resume his austerities.

(7)

गते तत्सिन् नरश्रेष्ठ दितिः परमहर्शिता।

कुशणत्वं समासादा तपसेते सुद्राकृणम् ॥ 8  ॥

Duly reaching Kuśaplava when Kaśyapa had departed, O jewel among men, Diti, full of great joy, began to practise most severe austerities. (8)

तपस्तस्यां हि कुर्वैल्या परिचर्यां चकार हा ।

सह्याक्षो नरश्रेष्ठ परया गृणसम्पदा ॥ 9  ॥

While she practised austerities, Indra, the thousand-eyed god, O jewel among men,

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

rendered personal service to her through his exuberant wealth of virtues: so the tradition goes. (9)

अर्सिन कुशान् काण्डमपः फलं मूलं तथैव च।

न्यवेदवत् सहस्वाक्षी यचान्यदिप काबूक्षितम् ॥ 10  ॥

Indra brought for her use fire, blades of Kuśa grass, firewood, water, fruits as well as roots and whatever else was desired by her. (10)

गात्रसंवाहनैश्चैव प्रभापनयनैस्तथा।

शकः सर्वेषु कालेषु द्वितं परिचचार है ॥ 11  ॥

Indra, it is said, served Diti at all times by massaging her wearied limbs and thus relieving her fatigue. (11)

पूर्णे वर्षेसहसे सा दर्शाने स्युनन्दन।

दिति: परमसंह्छटा सहस्वाक्षमथाब्बवीत् ॥ 12  ॥

Full one thousand years but ten having elapsed, O Rāma, the celebrated Diti, who felt immensely delighted, forthwith spoke to Indra as follows: (12)

तप्रश्रस्ता वर्षिण प्रद्र शीयैवतां वर।

अविशिष्टानि भई ते भातरं इर्थ्यसे ततः ॥ 13  ॥

"Only ten years have yet to be spent by me in practising austerities, O jewel among the powerful! May prosperity attend on you! You will after that behold a half-brother by your side. (13)

यमहं त्वकृते पुत्र तमाधास्ये जयोत्सुकम्।

त्रैलोक्यविजयं पुत्र सह भोक्ष्यसि विज्ञच: ॥ 14  ॥

"I shall place on friendly terms with you my future son—whom I sought for your destruction's sake, my son, and who is consequently expected to be ever eager to conquer you—so that free from all anxiety you will enjoy with him, my son, the conquest of all the three worlds that will be vanquished by him. (14)

याचितेन सुरश्रष्ठ पिता तव महात्मना।

वरो वर्षसहस्राने मम दत्त: सुतं प्रति ॥ 15  ॥

"A boon to the effect that I should have a son at the end of a thousand years was

granted in my favour, O jewel among gods, by your high-souled father, Sage Kaśyapa, when implored by me." (15)

इत्युक्त्वा च दितितस्तत्र प्रागे मध्यं दिनेश्वेर।

निद्रायापहता देवी पादौ कृतावश शर्पर्नितः ॥ 16  ॥

Saying so, as the sun had just reached the meridian, the glorious Diti was overtaken by sleep and forthwith lay down placing her feet where her head ought to have lain. (16)

दूधा तामशुर्षि शक्र: पादयो: कृतमूर्धजाम्।

शिर: स्थाने कृतौ पादौ जहास च मुमोदर च। 17  ॥

Indra laughed and rejoiced to see her in an impure posture having unconsciously allowed her hair to touch her feet, and to behold her feet placed where her head ought to have lain. (17)

तस्या: शरीरविर्वर प्रविवेश पुरंदर:।

गर्भ च ससधा राम चिच्छेद परमात्मवान्।। 18  ॥

Indra entered the orifice of her genitals by dint of his yogic power, O Rāma, and carved the foetus into seven, fully alert as he was. (18)

भिध्यामानस्तो गर्भो वज्रेण शतपर्वेणा।

रुरोद सुस्वरं राम ततो दितिरबुध्यत्।। 19  ॥

The foetus thereupon cried in a shrill voice while being cut with his thunderbolt, a weapon with a hundred edges, O Rama, and Diti then woke up. (19)

मा रुदो मा रुदरशेति पर्भ शक्रो3प्रभापात ।

विषयेद च महातेजा रुदन्तमपि वासव: ॥ 20  ॥

Indra went on saying to the foetus, "Pray, do not cry, do not cry!" Nay, the exceptionally glorious Vāsava (a name of Indra) continued to carve the foetus again and again till each part was subdivided into seven, even though it remained crying.(20) न हतव्यं न हतव्यमिवेवं दितिरब्रवीत्। निष्पयात ततः शक्रो मातुर्विचनगौरवात् ॥ 21  ॥

Diti only said, "The foetus should not be killed, it should not be killed." Out of deference to the remonstrance of his



stepmother, Indra thereupon emerged from her womb. (21)

प्राङ्लिस्वैग्रसहिता दितिं शक्रो3प्यभाषता।

अशुचिद्वि सुमासि पादपोः: कृतमूधर्जा ॥ 22  ॥

Appearing with his thunderbolt, Indra spoke to Diti with folded-hands as follows: "You lay asleep, O venerable lady, in an impure posture with your hair

touching the feet. (22)

तद्तरमहं लब्ध्या शकह्नतारमहावे ।

अधिनन्दे ससधा देवि तन्मे त्वं क्रन्तमहंसि ॥ 23  ॥

"Seizing that vulnerable point I carved into seven the foetus that was designed to kill Indra (myself) in an encounter. You ought to pardon this offence of mine, O worshipful lady!"

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंये आदिकाये बालकाण्डे घटचलार्शेंश: सर्ग: ॥ 46  ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-six in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

समचत्वारिंश: सर्ग:

Canto XLVII

Viśwāmitra tells Śri Rāma how on the very site of the grove where Diti practised her austerities, Viśāla, a son of Ikṣwāku, built the city of Viśāla. Sumati, the contemporary ruler of Viśāla, receives Viśwāmitra and his party as his distinguished guests

ससधा तु कृते गर्भे दिति: परमदु:खिता।

सहस्वाखं दुराधर्ष वाक्यं सानुनयाब्बवीत् ॥ 9  ॥

Sore afflicted on her foetus having been split into seven (batches of seven each), Diti for her part spoke as follows in a conciliatory tone to Indra (the thousand-eyed god), who was difficult to overpower by force: (1)

ममापराधाद् नर्षोर्ध्य सस्था शक्लीकृत: ।

नापराधो हि देवेश्त तवाय बलमूदन ॥ 2  ॥

"This foetus has been split into seven through my fault, O ruler of gods! No blame in this behalf attaches to you, O destroyer of the demon Bala! (2)

प्रियं त्वलृकात्मख्यामि मम गर्भविपर्यंपे।

मस्तां सम समानां स्थानपाला भवन्तु ते ॥ 3  ॥

"I wish to see your attempt at destroying my foetus turned favourable to both of us. Let these seven into seven (7×7=49) parts

of my foetus fill the place of the seven batches of wind-gods (each consisting of seven and evidently killed in their conflict with the demons). (3)

वातस्कथा इमे सस चरन्तु दिवि पुरक।

माठता इति विख्याता दिव्यरूपा ममातजना: ॥ 4  ॥

"Widely known as the forty-nine wind-gods (Maruts, so-called because they were addressed by you in the words 'मा रूह:—do not cry—and assuming ethereal forms let these seven into seven sons of mine move in the aerial region in the form of the seven belts of air (bearing the names of Ávaha, Pravaha, Sarivaha, Udvaha, Vivaha, Parivaha and Paravaha), O dear child! (4) ब्रह्मलोकं चरलेक इन्द्रलोकं तथापर:।

दिव्याव्युरिति ख्यातस्तुतीयोप्रि महायशग: ॥ 5  ॥

"Let one of these batches blow in Brahmaloka, the realm of Brahmā, another in the realm of Indra, and a third, known as



the celestial air and enjoying great fame, blow in the aerial region. (5)

चत्वारस्तु सुरश्रेष्ठ दिशो वे तव शासानत्।

संचरिष्यन्ति भई ते कालेन हिम मामात्मजाः ॥ 6  ॥

त्वकृतनेव नाना वै मारुता इति विश्रुन्ता ।

तस्यास्तद् वचनं श्रुला सहसाक्षः पुरंदरः ॥ 7  ॥

उवाच प्राङ्सिलवांस्यमितीदं बलसूदनः ।

सर्वेमेतद् यथोक्ते ते भविष्यति न संशयाः ॥ 8  ॥

"My other four batches of seven sons each, O jewel among gods, indeed will actually traverse the four quarters from time to time according to your direction. May prosperity attend you. They will henceforth be widely known as the Maruts according to the very name given by yourself (vide verse 4 above). Hearing her aforesaid appeal the thousand-eyed Indra (the destroyer of strongholds) and the slayer of the demon Bala, made the following reply to Diti with folded hands: 'All this will come to pass as suggested by you: there is no doubt about it. (6-8)

विचारियन्ति भई ते देवस्पापतत्वात्मज्ञ:।

एवं तो निश्रयं कृत्ता मातापुर्यो तपोवने || १ ||

जग्मतुग्रिविदं राम कृताध्योविति न: श्रुतम्।

एप देश: स काकुत्थ महेन्द्राध्युणितः पुरा || १० ||

दिविं तय तपसिस्द्रामेवं परिचचार स: ।

इर्थवाकोस्त् नरव्याघ पुत्र: परमधार्थमिकः || ११ ||

अलव्युषायामुतयो जिशणत इति विश्वशुतः ।

तेन चासीदिह स्थाने विशणतेति पुरी कृता || १२ ||

“Your sons will move about in the form of the wind-gods.’ Having reached an agreement on these lines in the grove intended for austerities, and thus accomplished of purpose, the mother Diti and her step-son, Indra, both ascended to heaven, O Rāma; so have we heard. This is that tract, O scion of Kakuttha, formerly inhabited by the great Indra, where he rendered personal service as aforesaid to Diti, who achieved the end of her austerities. Now Ikswaku, O tiger among men, had a most pious son, born of Alambuṣa and widely known by the name of Viśāla. By

him was built on this very site a city named Viśalā, after his own name. (9-12)

विशालस्य सुतो राम हेमचन्द्रो महाबल: ।

सुचन्द्र इति विख्यातो हेमचन्द्रदानन्तर: ॥ 13  ॥

"The mighty son of Viśāla, O Rāma, was Hemacandra; while Hemacandra's immediate successor was known far and wide by the name of Sucandra. (13)

सुचन्द्रतनयो राम धूमाश इति विश्रुतः।

धूमाश्रतनयशप्रिय सुउवय: समपदात् ॥ 14  ॥

"The son of Sucandra, O Rāma, was widely known by the name of Dhūmraśwa and Srñjaya, son of Dhūmraśwa, came next. (14)

सुउयस्य सुतः श्रीमान् सहदेवः प्रतापवान्।

कृशाश्रः सहदेवस्य पुत्रः परमधार्थमिकः ॥ 15  ॥

"The glorious and mighty Sahadeva was the son of Srñjaya, and Kuśaśwa was the highly pious son of Sahadeva. (15)

कृशाश्यस महातेजाः सोमदन्तः प्रतापवान्।

सोमदन्तस्य पुत्रस्तु काकुलक्ष इति विश्रुतः ॥ 16  ॥

"The exceptionally glorious and mighty Somadatta was the son of Kuśaśwa, and Somadatta's son was known far and wide by the name of Kakutstha. (16)

तस्य पुरो महातेजाः सम्यल्ये पुरीमिमाम्।

आवस्ति परमप्रख्यः सुमितिनां दुर्जयः ॥ 17  ॥

"His yonder highly glorious and most renowned son, Sumati by name, who is hard to conquer, has his seat of government in this city at present. (17)

इक्षवाकोस्तु प्रसादेन सर्वे वैशालिका नृपाः ।

दीर्घार्युगो महात्मानो वीर्यन्तः सुधार्थिकाः ॥ 18  ॥

"By the grace of Ikswāku, really speaking all the rulers of Visālā are long-lived, high-souled, powerful and most pious. (18)

इहादा रजनीमेकां सुखं स्वप्यामहे वयम्।

शः प्रभाते नरश्रेष्ठ जनकं इद्युमहसि ॥ 19  ॥

"We shall comfortably repose here for this one night; tommorrow morning you ought

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

to be able to see Janaka, O jewel among men!" (19)

सुमतिस्तु महातेजा विश्वामिजमुपागतम्।

श्रुत्वा नरवश्रेष्ठः प्रत्यागच्छमहायशा: 11 २० ॥

Hearing of Viśwāmitra having arrived, the exceptionally glorious and highly renowned King Sumati, a veritable jewel among the foremost of men, came ahead to receive him. (20)

पूजां च परमां कृत्वा सोपाध्याय: सबान्थः।

प्राझलि: कुशलं पृधा विश्वामित्रमथाब्वीत् ॥ 21  ॥

Nay, offering to him the highest worship with the help of his family priest and kinsmen and inquiring after his welfare, the king forthwith spoke to Viśwāmitra with folded-hands as follows : (21)

धन्योउस्मनुगृहीतोप्रिय सय स म विषयं मुने ।

सम्प्रातो दर्शनं चैव नास्ति धन्यतरे मम ॥ 22  ॥

“I am blessed and beholden to you, O sage, in that you have visited my territory and come within my sight too. None is more blessed than myself.” (22)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकांये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे ससचत्वार्शस: सर्ग: ॥ 47  ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-seven in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Risi and the oldest epic.

अष्टचार्वारिश: सर्ग:

Canto XLVIII

Having stayed overnight at Viśālā as an honoured guest of Sumati, Śri Rāma, accompanied by Viśwāmitra and the other sages, heads towards Mithilā (the capital of King Janaka) and, on reaching on the way a deserted hermitage and, inquiring about it, is told by Viśwāmitra how Ahalyā, wife of Sage Gautama, whose hermitage it was, was subjected to a curse by her husband

पृधा तु कुशलं तत्र परस्यरसमागे।

कथान्ते सुमितलविंस्य व्याजहार महापुन्ति।। 1 ।।

Having inquired after the sage's welfare, Sumati, at the end of the dialogue that ensued in the course of their meeting with one another, spoke to the great sage Viśwāmitra as follows: (1)

इमौ कुमारी भयं ते देवतूल्यपराकमी।

गजसिंहगती वीरो शार्दूलवृषभोपमे।। 2 ।।

"May God bless you! These two valiant lads, who are equal in prowess to gods, walk with the gait of the elephant and the lion and look like a tiger and a bull, respectively. (2)

पद्यप्रविशालाक्षो खड़नृताप्रभूरो। अश्वभाविव रूपेण समुपस्थितयोवानी।। 3 ।।

"Having eyes large as the petals of a lotus and carrying, as they do, on their person a sword, a quiver and a bow each, they vie with the Aświns (the twin-born physicians of gods, celebrated for their physical charm) in their comeliness of form and stand at the threshold of youth. (3)

यदृच्छयैव नां प्रासौ देवलोकादिवमारी ।

कथं पद्ध्यामिष्ठ प्रासो किमर्थं कर्य वा मुने ॥ 4  ॥

"Nay, they look like two gods descended on earth from the celestial plane of their own will. How and what for have they travelled on foot to this place and whose sons are they, O sage? (4)

भृप्यन्ताविमं देरां चन्द्रसुयांविवाम्बरम्।

प्रत्यरणे सदूगी प्रमाणेक्तृतेचिहेतः ॥ 5  ॥



किमर्थ च नरश्रेष्ठी सम्पाती दुर्गमे पथि।

वरायुधधरी वीरी श्रोतुमिच्छामि तत्त्वः ॥ 6  ॥

"I wish to hear in reality as to wherefore the two heroes, the foremost among men, who are replicas of each other in the size of their body, in the outer expression of their feelings as well as in the movements of their body, have got on a track so difficult to tread, gracing this land even as the moon and the sun illumine the sky, and carrying excellent weapons on their person." (5-6)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा यथावृतं न्यवेदयत्।

सिद्धान्ध्रमनिवासं च राक्षसानां वधं यथा।

विश्वामिवसचः श्रुत्वा राजा परमविसिमस्तः ॥ 9  ॥

अतिथी परमं प्रागौ पुत्री दुरशस्थ्य स्तौ ।

पूजयामास विक्षियत् सत्काराहौ महाबलों ॥ 8  ॥

Hearing this submission of Sumati, Viśwāmitra told him everything as it had actually come about, as also of their sojourn at Siddhāsrama and the destruction of the ogress during that period. The king was greatly amazed to hear the narrative of Viśwāmitra. Nay, he worshipped with due ceremony the two mighty sons of Daśaratha, who deserved all attentions and had called on him as his highly distinguished guests. (7-8)

ततः परमस्कारं सुमतेः प्रायः राश्चो।

उष्य तत्र निशगामेकां जमतुर्मिथिलां ततः ॥ 9  ॥

Having received the warmest hospitality from Sumati, Śrī Rāma and Lakṣmana, the two scions of Raghu, spent one night there at his capital and proceeded from there to Mithila the next day. (9)

तां दृष्टा मुनयः सर्वे जनकस्य पूरीं शुभाम्।

साधु साधिति शंसन्तो मिथिलांं समपुजयन् ॥ 10  ॥

Beholding that beautiful capital of King Janaka all the sages forming the party of Viśwāmitra greatly admired Mithila, exclaiming “Good! Excellent !!” (10)

मिथिलोपवने तत्र आश्रम दुर्शय राश्वः ।

पुराणं निर्जनं रवं पप्रच्छ मुनिपुंगवम् ॥ 11  ॥

Seeing then an old and delightful, though desolate, hermitage in a grove on the outskirts of Mithilā, Śrī Rāma, a scion of Raghu, inquired as follows of Viśwāmitra, the foremost of hermits: (11)

इदमाभ्रमसंकाशं किं निवदं मुनिवर्जितम्।

श्रोतुमिच्छामि भगवन् कस्यायं पूर्वं आश्रमः ॥ 12  ॥

“What can this place possibly be, which, though looking like a hermitage, is devoid of hermits? I wish to hear, O venerable Sir, whose hermitage it has been in the past.” (12)

तच्छुला राघवेणोकं वाक्यं वाक्यविशारदः।

प्रत्युवाच महातेजा विश्वामिगे महामुपिनः ॥ 13  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid question asked by Śri Rama (a scion of Raghu), the great sage Viśwāmitra, who is exceptionally glorious and skilled in speech, replied as follows: (13)

इत ते कथयिष्यामि शृणु तत्वेन रायव ।

यस्यैतदाश्रमपदं शर्नं कोपान्महात्मन: ॥ 14  ॥

"Ah, please listen! I shall tell you in truth, O scion of Raghu, to what great soul this site of a past hermitage belonged and by whose wrath it was subjected to a curse. (14)

गौतमस्य नराश्रेष पूर्वेमारसीम्हाहात्मतः ।

आश्रमो दिव्यसंकाशः सुरैरपि सपूर्णितः ॥ 15  ॥

"The hermitage, which looked like a heavenly retreat, nay, which was highly honoured even by gods, formerly belonged to the high-souled sage, Gautama, O jewel among men! (15)

स चार्र तप आतिछटद्धल्यासहितः पुरा।

वर्षेपूरान्यनेकानि राजपुर महायशः ॥ 16  ॥

"In this very hermitage, O highly Meritorious prince, he practised austerities with his wife, Ahalya, for many rounds of years. (16)

तस्यान्तरं विदित्वा च महस्वाक्षः श्रचीपति: ।

मुनीवेधशरो भूतला अहत्यामिदमब्रवीत् ॥ 11  ॥

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

Coming to know of his absence from the hermitage due to his having gone out for his daily bath etc., Indra (who is noted for his thousand eyes), the spouse of Śaci, appeared in the guise of the sage Gautama and spoke to Ahalyā as follows: (17)

རྟོགས་ བཀྲིས་ བཀྲིས་ བཀྲིས་ བཀྲིས་ བཀྨོན་ བཀྲིས་ བཀྲིས་ བཀྲིས་ བཀྲོན་ བཀྲོན་ བཀྲོན་ བཀྲོན་ བཀྲིས་ བཀྲིས་ བཀྲིས་ བཀྱིན་ བཀྲིན་ བཀྲིན་ བཀྲིན་ བཀྲིན་ བཀྱིན་ བཀྲིན་ བཀྲིན་ བཀྲིག་ བཀྲིག་ བཀྲིག་ བཀྲིག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྨེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྱེལ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲོག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྨེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྱེལ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲོག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྨེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྱེལ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲོག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྨེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྱེལ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲོག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྨེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྱེལ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲོག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྨེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྱེལ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲེག་ བཀྲུམ་ བཀྲེག་ བཀ�

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

तथा शल्चा च वै शर्क भार्यामपि च शासवान्।

इह वर्षसहस्वाणि बहूनि निवसिष्यसि ॥ 21  ॥

वातभक्षा निराहारा तप्वती भस्मशापिति ।

अदुर्ग्या सर्वभूतानामाश्रमेउस्मिन् वसिष्यसि ॥ 30  ॥

Nay, having imprecated Indra in the foregoing words, he cursed his wife too as follows: 'You will stay here for many thousands of years without food or drink, living on air alone, and remain lying on ashes full of remorse. You will dwell in this hermitage unperceived by anyone of all created beings. (29-30)

यदा लेतद् वर्न घोर रामो दशरथाम्बनः।

आगमिष्यति दुर्धर्यस्तदा पूता भविष्यसि ॥ 31  ॥

“When, however, Śri Rāma, son of Daśaratha, who is hard to overcome for anyone, visits this fearful grove, then alone you will be absolved of your sin. (31)

तत्यातिथेन दुर्वैने लोपमहाविर्वर्जिता।

मत्सकारां मुदा युक्ता स्वं वपुधार्थिथयसि ॥ 32  ॥

“‘Completely rid of cupidity and infatuation by virtue of hospitality that you will extend to him (in the same invisible form), O immoral woman, you will regain your own pristine body and return to my presence full of joy.’” (32)

एवमुक्का महातेजा गौतमो दृष्ट्वारिणीम्।

इममाओममुल्यघ सिद्धाराणसेविते ।

हिमवचिष्णेखे रथे तपसेने महातपा: ॥ 33  ॥

"Having imprecated, as aforesaid, that woman of immoral conduct, the exceptionally glorious sage Gautama left this hermitage and the great ascetic resumed his austerities on a delightful peak of the Himalayas, frequented by Siddhas and Cāranas." (33)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामागणे वात्मीकोंये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेउड्चत्वारिंश: सर्ि: ॥ 48  ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-eight in the Bālakaṇḍa of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

एकोनपञ्राश: सर्ग:

Canto XLIX

At the intercession of the gods, Indra is supplied with testicles of a ram; Ahalyā gets back her pristine celestial form at the very sight of Śri Rāma, the moment he enters the hermitage, and the two divine brothers are entertained by the lady with the help of her husband

अफलस्तु ततः शक्रो देवानिनपुरोगामान्।

अब्बवीत् जस्तयनः सिद्धगन्धर्वचारणान् ॥ 1  ॥

"Deprived of his testicles, Indra with timid eyes then sought the presence of and spoke to the gods headed by Agni, the god of fire, as well as to the Siddhas, Gandharvas and Čaranas as follows: (1)

कुर्वता तपसो विज्ञं गौतमस्य महात्मनः।

क्रोधमुत्थाद हि मया सुराकार्यमिदं कृतम् ॥ 2  ॥

“‘Hampering as I did the austerities of

the high-souled Gautama by exciting his wrath and thereby foiling his attempt to claim my throne, I have only just served the cause of gods. (2)

अफलोर्यमि कृतसतेन क्रोधात् सा च निराकृता ।

शापमोक्षेण महता तपोःस्यापहतं मया ॥ 3  ॥

“In a fit of anger I have accordingly been deprived of my virility and Ahalyā too has been disowned by him. He has thus been robbed by me of his spiritual



energy by being incited to pronounce a great curse on me as well as on his wife. (3)

तन्मां सुरवारा: सर्वे सर्पिसंधा: सचारणा:।

सुरकायकंरं यूयं सफलं कत्नुमंछथ ॥ 4  ॥

“Therefore, with the co-operation of the host of seers and the celestial bards, O jewels among gods, you should all see me restored to my manhood, since I have served the cause of gods.’ (4)

शतक्रतीर्वच: श्रुला देवा: सानिभपुरोगमाः।

पितृदेवानुपेत्याहु: सर्वे सह मरुदणैः ॥ 5  ॥

Hearing the appeal of Indra, all the gods, accompanied by the batches of the wind-gods, with Agni at their head, approached the celestial manes (Kavyavāhana and others) and spoke to them as follows: (5)

अयं मेष: स्वपुण: शकंः ह्वयपण: कृतः ।

मेषस्य वृषणौ गृह्न शक्रायशु प्रयच्छत ॥ 6  ॥

“Here is a ram full of virility, while Indra stands actually deprived of his manhood by a curse from Sage Gautama. Taking the testicles of the ram, pray, transfer them at once to the person of Indra. (6)

अफलस्तु कृती मेषः परां तुक्ति प्रदायस्ति ।

भवतां हर्षणार्थ च ये च दायस्ति मानतः ।

अक्षयं हि फलं तेषां यूयं दास्यथ पुक्कलम् ॥ 7  ॥

“The castrated ram will surely afford you supreme satisfaction. Nay, to those men indeed who will offer hereafter such a ram for propitiating you, will surely be conferred by you a handsome and undying reward.” (7)

अगनेसु वचनं शुत्वा पितृदेवा: समागता:।

उरपाट्य मेवयुवणी सहस्वाक्षे न्यवेशग्न ॥ 8  ॥

"Hearing the intercession of Agni, the celestial manes unanimously agreed and removed the testicles of the ram and actually implanted them in the scrotum of Indra (the thousand-eyed god). (8)

तदाप्रभूति काकुत्थ यिपृदेवा: समापाता:।

अफलान् भुजते मेवान् फलैस्तेषामयोजयन् ॥ 9  ॥

"From that time onward, O scion of Kakuttha, the celestial manes collectively enjoy gelded rams alone and endow those offering them with the fruit of offering whole rams. (9)

इन्द्रस्तु मेवयुणस्तदायभूति राघव ।

गौतमस्य प्रभावेण तपसा च महात्मन: ॥ 10  ॥

"And from that time onward, O scion of Raghu, as an evidence of the spiritual power of the high-souled Gautama, Indra has actually borne the testicles of a ram. (10)

तदागच्छ महातेज आश्रमं पुण्यकर्मण:।

तारयैनां महाभागामहल्यां देवस्किपणिणि ॥ 11  ॥

"Therefore, O exceptionally glorious prince, step into the hermitage of Gautama, who has performed virtuous deeds, and redeem this highly blessed woman, Ahalyā, who was heretofore invested with a celestial form." (11)

विश्वामित्रवचः श्रुता राघवः सहलक्षणः ।

विश्वामित्रं पुरस्कृत्य आश्रमं प्रविवेश ह। 12  ॥

ददर्शं च महाभागां तपसा ड्योतितप्रभाम् ।

लोकैरपि समाग्य दुर्विंग्रीखां सुरासुरैः ॥ 13  ॥

प्रयतलार्थिमितां धारा दिव्यां मायामयीमिव ।

धूमेनाभिपरितांजूँ दीमामर्निशखामिव ॥ 14  ॥

सतुषारावृतां साभां पूर्णचन्द्रभामिव ।

मध्येउभसो दुराधर्षा दौसां सूर्यप्रभामिव ॥ 15  ॥

Hearing the intercession of Viśwāmitra, Śri Rāma, a scion of Raghu, accompanied by Lakṣmana, made his way into the hermitage, placing Viśwāmitra at the head, so the tradition goes, and beheld the celestial lady, who was highly blessed in the sense that Śri Rāma's eyes fell on her, whose effulgence had been brightened by her austerities, who could not be easily perceived even by gods and demons, much less by earthly beings even on drawing near due to the curse of Gautama, who had been

* VÅLMÍKI-RÅMÅYANA *

produced by the creator with great effort and looked like a product of magic, who looked like a blazing flame wrapped all over in smoke or like the halo of the full moon obscured by a veneer of snow and screened by a cloud or again like a dazzling bright circle of light round the sun appearing in the midst of water existing in clouds. (12-15) सा हि गौतमवाव्येन दुनिंगरीख्या बभूव ह।

प्रयाणामपि लोकानां यावद् रामस्य दर्शनम्।

शापस्यातमुपागम्य तेषां दर्शनमागता ॥ 16  ॥

Under the curse of Gautama, really speaking, she had grown imperceptible to all the three worlds, pending her sight of Śri Rāma; so it is said. Having reached the end of the curse she had now come within the range of their sight. (16)

राघवी तु तदा तस्याः पादौ जगृहतुर्मृदा।

स्मरनी गौतमवचः प्रतिजग्राह सा हि तौ ॥ 17  ॥

Śri Rāma and Laksmaṇa, the two scions of Raghu, for their part clasped her feet with joy on that occasion; while she in her turn welcomed both, recalling, as she did, the prophesy of Gautama. (17)

पाधामर्थ तथा४५तिथ्यं चकार सुसमाहिता।

प्रतिजग्राह काकुत्थो विधिपृद्रेन कर्मणा ॥ 18  ॥

Fully composed in mind she offered to them, with due ceremony as enjoined by the scriptural ordinance, water to wash their feet and hands with as well as other hospitality and Śrī Rāma gladly accepted them. (18)

पुष्यवृष्टिमहत्यासीद् देवद्रतुभिन:स्वरैः।

गन्धर्वासरसां चैव महानासीत् समुत्सवः ॥ 11  ॥

There was an abundant shower of flowers, from the heavens, accompanied by the beating of kettledrums by gods. And there followed a great rejoicing among Gandharvas and celestial nymphs. (19)

साधु साधिति देवातामह्यां समपूजन्।

तपोबलविश्छूदाङ्गों गौतमस्य वशानुगाम् ॥ 20  ॥

"The gods heartily applauded the aforesaid Ahalyā—who had been perfectly purified of body by dint of her austerities and now followed the will of Gautama—in the words "Good! Excellent !!" (20)

गौतमोदप्रि महातेजा अहल्यासहितः सुखी।

रामं सम्पूच्य विधिधत् तपसेपे महातपा: ॥ 21  ॥

"The exceptionally glorious Gautama too (who had evidently returned to his hermitage on being foretold of the advent of Śri Rāma) felt happy in the company of Ahalyā; nay, having duly worshipped Śri Rāma according to the scriptural ordinance, the great ascetic resumed his austerities.

(21)

रामोप्रि परमां पूजां गौतमस्य महामुपे: ।

सकाशाद्विधित्त प्राय्य जगाम मिधित्यां ततः ॥ 22  ॥

Having duly received the highest honour at the hands of the eminent sage Gautama, Śri Rāma too proceeded from that hermitage to Mithilā. (22)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीचे आदिकाव्ये बालकारण्डे

एकोनपत्राश: सर्ि: ॥ 49  ॥

Thus ends Canto Forty-nine in the Balakanda of the glorious Ramāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.



पश्राश: सर्गे:

Canto L

Śri Rāma and others reach Mithilā and are received in advance by King Janaka, headed by his family priest, Śatānanda; Viśwāmitra satisfies their curiosity about the two princes of Ayodhyā

ततः प्रापुतरां गत्वा रामः सौमित्रिणा सह।

विश्वामित्रं पुरस्कृत्य यज्ञावटमुपागमत्॥ 1  ॥

Proceeding in a north-easterly direction from the said hermitage, and placing Viśwāmitra at the head of the party, Śri Rāma, accompanied by Laksmana (son of Sumitrā), reached the sacrificial enclosure of Janaka, the king of Mithilā. (1)

रामस्तु मुनिश्राईल्मुपाचा सहलक्ष्मण:।

साध्वी यत्रसम्पद्धिहिं जनकस्य महात्मन: ॥ 2  ॥

Śri Rāma for his part alongwith Lakṣmana remarked to Viśwāmitra (a tiger among hermits), “Excellent indeed is the preparation made for the sacrifice undertaken by the high-souled Janaka. (2)

बहुनीह सहस्वाणि नानादेशिनवासिनाना।

ब्राहणानां महाभाग वेदाध्यवनशालिनाना ॥ 3  ॥

ऋषिवादाङ्ध दुर्वसने शकटीशतरसंकृता: ।

देशो विधीयतां बढ़ान् यत्र वल्यामहे ववम् ॥ 4  ॥

"Many thousands of Brāhmanas enriched with a study of the Vedas and living in different parts of the country can be seen here, as well as small enclosures set apart for Rṣis and full of hundreds of carts, carrying the requisites for their Agnihotra or daily oblations to the sacred fire, O highly blessed sage! Let a suitable site be selected, where we should halt, O holy one!" (3-4)

रामस्य वचनं श्रुला विश्वामित्रो महापुनि: । निवासमकरोद् देशे विविके सलिलावित्ते ॥ 5  ॥

Hearing the submission of Śri Rāma, the great sage Viśwāmitra halted at a

secluded and clean spot supplied with water. (5)

विश्वामिन्न प्रभुक्त्य श्रुत्वा नृपवरस्तदा।

श्रतानन्दं पुरस्कृत्य पुरोहितमिनिद्धत: ॥ 6  ॥

ऋलिजो5पि महात्यानस्वध्यंमादाय स्तवर्म।

प्रत्युजगाम सहसा विनयेन समविताः ॥ 9  ॥

विश्वामित्राय धर्मेण ददौ धर्मपुरस्कृतः ।

प्रतिगृहूत तु तां पूर्जां जनकस्य महात्मनः ॥ 6  ॥

पप्रच्छ कुशलं राजो यत्रस्य च निरामयम् ।

स तांडाश्य मुनीन् पुरुषा सोपाध्यायपुरोधस: ॥ 9  ॥

यशाह्मैभिपिभः सर्वैः समागच्छत् प्रह्छयन्त् ।

अथ राजा मुनिश्रष्टं कृताझलिरभाषत ॥ 10  ॥

Hearing of Viśwāmitra having arrived (with his party) on that occasion, the irreproachable Janaka, the foremost of kings, full of humility, went forth all at once in a hurry to meet him, placing at the head his family priest, Śatananda (son of Gautama) and other high-souled priests officiating at his sacrifice, and taking water to wash the hands of the distinguished guests, and offered it to Viśwāmitra alongwith other items of hospitality such as Madhuparka* in accordance with the scriptural ordinance. Accepting the aforesaid hospitality of the high-souled Janaka, Viśwāmitra for his part inquired after the welfare of Janaka as well as about the unhampered progress of his sacrificial performance. Inquiring after the welfare of those hermits too that had accompanied the king as well as that of the priests officiating at the sacrifice and Sátananda, the family priest, he next embraced all the Rṣis in order of seniority

* A refreshing drink consisting of curds, ghee (clarified butter), water, honey and sugar-candy: 'दधि सम्पिर्लें क्षौरं सिता चैतेषि प्रद्धिः : प्रोचने मयम्पकं: —- ||'

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

with great delight. The king then submitted to Viśwāmitra, the foremost of hermits with folded hands as follows: (6-10)

आसने भगवानास्ता सहैभमुनीनुपंगले: 1

जनकम्य वच: श्रुला निष्पसाद महामुने: 11 ११ १

"Let Your Holiness be seated on the seat offered by me along with these jewels among ascetics." Hearing the request of Janaka, the great sage Viswámitra sat down. (11)

प्रपोधा श्रलिजश्रैव राजा च सहमन्धिभ: 1

आसनेयु चथान्यायमुपविध्या: समन्त: 11 १२ १

Sátananda, Janaka's family priest, as well as the priests officiating at the sacrifice and the king himself with his ministers sat down on their seats in order of seniority on all sides of Viśwāmitra at his request. (12)

द्वृधा स नुपतितस्त विश्वाधिमयाधाब्वती।

अष्ट यज्ञसमूद्रमें सफला दैवलै: कृता ॥ 13  ॥

Turning his eyes towards Viśwāmitra, the said king then spoke to him as follows in that assembly: "The preparations made for my sacrificial performance have been fulfilled by the gods today. (13)

अष्ट यज्ञफलं प्रासं भगवद्धर्शनामय। धन्योउस्म्यनुर्हीतेणसि यस्य मे मुपिनुपगव: ॥ 14  ॥ यज्ञोपसदनं ब्रहान् प्रासोसि मुनिनिभः सह। द्वारणहं तु ब्रहापै दीक्षामाहुर्मनीषिण: ॥ 15  ॥ ततो भागार्थिनो देवान् उष्टुमहंसि कोशिक। इत्युक्स्ता मुनिशार्तूतं प्रहष्टवदनस्तदा ॥ 16  ॥ पुस्तसं परिपचछ्छ प्राझलि: प्रयतो नृपः। इमौ कुमारी भई ते देवतृत्यपराक्रमो ॥ 17  ॥ गजतृत्ययाती वीरी शार्दालवृषभोपायमों। पवघपत्रविशालाक्षी खड्गरुपृधीधनुर्धरी।

अधिनाविव रूपेण समुपरिश्वत्यावौलो ॥ 18  ॥

“Nay, the fruit of my sacrifice has been attained by me this very day through Your Holiness’ sight alone. I feel blessed and indebted to you, in that you, the foremost of ascetics, have arrived at my sacrificial

grounds alongwith a number of sages. The wise among the priests, O Brāhmaṇa Rṣi, declare that my sacrificial vow is to continue for twelve more days only. After that, O scion of Kuśa, you will see (with your clairvoyant vision) the gods who appear in person seeking their share of the sacrificial offerings." Having submitted to Viśwāmitra, a veritable tiger among sages, as aforesaid on that occasion, the king, piously disposed as he was, questioned him once more with a cheerful countenance and folded-hands as follows: "May God bless you! These two valiant lads who are equal in prowess to the gods and whose gait resembles that of an elephant, look like a tiger and a bull, respectively. Having eyes as large as the petals of a lotus and carrying as they do on their person a sword, quiver and bow each, they vie with the Aświns (the twin-born physicians of gods, celebrated for their physical charm) in their comeliness of form and stand at the threshold of youth.

(14-18)

यद्ध्छयेव गां प्रागोे देवलोकादिवामरी।

कर्थ पद्ध्यामिह प्रागोे किमर्थं कर्य वा गुने ॥ 11  ॥

"Nay, they look like a pair of gods descended on earth from the celestial plane of their own will. How and what for or for whose sake have they travelled on foot to this place, O sage? (19)

वरायुधधारी वीरी कस्य पुत्रो महानुने।

भूषयन्ताविमं देशं चन्द्रसूर्वीविवाब्वमय। 20  ॥

परस्यरस्य सदूगी प्रमाणेण्ड्रृतचेष्टितः ।

काकपक्षधारी वीरो श्रोतृमिच्छामि तत्त्वतः ॥ 21  ॥

"Whose sons, O great sage, may be the two heroes wielding excellent weapons? I wish to hear in reality about the two gallant youths, who are gracing this land even as the moon and the sun illumine the sky, who are replicas of each other in the size of their body, in the outer expression of their feelings, as well as in the movements of their body, and who wear side-locks on their head."

(20-21)



תְבָרִי לַלְאָה בְּרִי לַלְאָה בְּרִי לַלְאָה בְּרִי לַלְאָה בְּרִי לַ

תְבָרִי לַלְאָה בְּרִי לַלְאָה בְּרִי לַלְאָה

Hearing the aforesaid inquiry of King Janaka, who was well-known to be an exalted soul, Sage Viswāmitra, who wields immense spiritual power, declared them to be sons of Emperor Daśaratha. (22)

सिद्धाभ्यमिवासं च राक्षसानां वधं तथा।

ततागमनवम्यं विशालायाश्रु दर्शनम्।। 23 ॥

अहल्यादर्गनं चैव गौतमेन समागमम्।

महाधनुषि जिज्ञासां कर्तुभागमानं तथा॥ 24  ॥

He also told Janaka of their intrepid journey to and sojourn at Siddhásrama, as

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये वाल्काण्डे पझास: सर्ग: ॥ 50  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty in the Balakāṇḍa of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

एकपञ्राश: सर्गी:

Canto LI

At the request of Sátananda, Viśwāmitra tells him how Ahalyā was redeemed by Śrī Rāma and entertained him with the help of her husband. And Sátananda in his turn commences narrating to Śrī Rāma the story of Viśwāmitra

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुला विश्वामित्रस्य धीमतः।

हृष्टयोमा महातेजाः शतानन्दो महातपाः ॥ 1  ॥

गौतमस्य सुतो ज्येष्ठस्तपसा द्योतिताप्रभः ।

रामसंदर्भनावेल परं विस्मयमागतः ॥ 2  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid story told by the celebrated Viśwāmitra, who was a repository of wisdom, the exceptionally glorious Śatānanda, the eldest son of Gautama—who was a great ascetic (like his father), nay, whose brilliance stood heightened by his asceticism—was thrilled with joy and felt greatly astonished at the very sight of Śri Rama. (1-2)

एतौ निषरणो सम्येक्ष्य शतानन्दो नृपात्यजी।

सुखासीनो मुनिश्रेष्ठं विश्वाधिमत्रमधाव्बती।। 3  ॥

Beholding these two princes, Śri Rāma

and Laksmana, seated and comfortably ensconced, the celebrated Sátananda now spoke to Viśwāmitra, the foremost of hermits as follows : (3)

अधि ते मुनिशादूल मम माता यशस्विनो।

दर्शिता राजपुत्राय तपो दीर्घमुपगाता ॥ 4  ॥

"Was my illustrious mother, who had been going through a long course of austerities, shown by you to Śri Rama, son of King Daśaratha, O tiger among sages?(4)

अधि रामे महातेजा मम माता यशस्विनो।

वन्यैषणहर्त पूजां पूजाडे सर्वदैहिनाम् ॥ 5  ॥

“Did my exceptionally glorious and illustrious mother offer hospitality with wild fruits etc., to Śri Rāma, who deserves to be honoured by all embodied souls? (5)



अपि रामाय कथितं यद् वृतं तत् पुरातनम्।

मम मातूर्दितजे उदेवेन दुरपृष्टितम् ॥ 6  ॥

"Did you tell Śri Rāma the old story of the outrage which was done by Indra to my mother, O exceptionally glorious sage? (6)

अपि कोशिका भई ते गृरणगा मम संगता ।

मम माता मुनिश्छेष्ठ रामसंदर्शनादित: ॥ 7  ॥

" May God bless you, O scion of Kuśika ! Was my mother united once again with my father, O jewel among ascetics, as a result of Śri Rāma's sight and other factors? (7)

अपि मे गुरुणा रामः पूर्जितः कुशिकाकासन।

इहागतो महतेजाः पूर्जा प्रायः महातनः ॥ 8  ॥

"Was Śri Rāma honoured by my father, O son of Kuśika, and has this exceptionally glorious prince come here after receiving the hospitality of that exalted soul? (8)

अपि शान्तेन मनसा गुरुमें कुशिकाकासन।

इहागतेन रामेपा पूर्जतेनाधिवादितः ॥ 9  ॥

"Was my father greeted with a tranquil mind by Śri Rāma when arrived and honoured by him in this grove, O son of Gādhi (a scion of Kuśa)?" (9)

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य विश्वामिगो महामुपिन: ।

प्रत्युवाच शतानन्दं वाक्यज्ञो वाक्यकोंविदम् ॥ 10  ॥

Hearing his aforesaid questionnaire, the great sage Viśwāmitra, who was well-versed in elocution, replied as follows to Śatānanda, a master of expression himself: (10)

नातिकान्तं मुनिश्रिष्टि कृतकं कृतं मया।

संगता मुनिना पली भागवेणेव रेणुका ॥ 11  ॥

"What ought to have been done was done by me; no omission was made. Ahalyā, the wife of Gautama, has been re-united with the sage (her husband), as Renuka, mother of Paraśurāma got re-united with her spouse, Jamadagni, a scion of Bhrgu." (11)

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य विश्वाभिमस्य श्रीमतः।

शतानन्दो महात्राना रामं वचनमब्रवीत् ॥ 12  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid reply of the celebrated Viśwāmitra, a man of wisdom, the exceptionally glorious Śatāmanda spoke to Śri Rāma as follows : (12)

स्वागतं ते नरश्रेष्ठ दिष्ट्या प्राप्तोरसि राषव।

विश्वाधिमं पुरस्कृत्य महर्शिमपराजितम् ॥ 13  ॥

"Welcome is your advent to this place, O jewel among men! Placing at the head the eminent seer, Viśwāmitra, who cannot be easily worsted, O scion of Raghu, you have arrived here through our good luck. (13)

अश्चल्यकर्मा तपसा ब्रहार्षिरमितप्रभः ।

विश्वामिज महातेजा वेद्य्येनं परमां गतिम्। 14  ॥

"The exceptionally glorious Viśwāmitra is credited with achievements which cannot even be conceived by others and has attained to the rank of a Brāhmaṇa Rṣi through sheer dint of askesis. He is invested with a splendour which is beyond measure. I know him to be the highest resort of all. (14)

नास्ति धन्यतरी राम त्वतो २०० यो भुवि कक्षन ।

गोगा कुशिकपुरसते येन तमं महतप: ॥ 15  ॥

“None else on earth is more blessed than you, O Rama, inasmuch as your guardian is Viśvāmitra, son of Kuśika, by whom great austerities have been performed. (15)

श्रूयतां चारिधाधास्यामि कौशिकस्य महात्मन: ।

यथा बलं यथा तत्वं तमे निगदातः श्रुणु ॥ 16  ॥

"Please listen! I shall point out to you as it is the might as well as the reality of the high-souled Viśwāmitra, son of Kuśika. Hear it from me even as I speak to you. (16)

राजा२५सौद्रेष धर्मात्मा दीर्घकालमरिद्म:।

धर्मेत्रः कृतविष्णु प्रजानां च हिते ततः ॥ 19  ॥

"The sage has for a long time been a pious king capable of subduing his enemies, knowing what is right, learned and devoted to the good of the people. (17)

प्रजापतिसुल्तस्वासीत् कुशो नाम महीपति:।

कुशस्य पुत्रो बलवान् कुशानाभः सुधार्थमिकः ॥ 18  ॥



"Formerly there was a king, Kuśa by name, a son of Brahma, the lord of created beings; while Kuśa's son was the mighty and highly pious Kuśanābha. (18)

कुशनाभ्युस्तत्वासीव गाधिरित्येव विश्रुतः । गाधे: पुत्रो महातेजा विश्वामिचो महामुनि: ॥ 19  ॥

"The son of Kuśanābha was widely known by the simple name of Gādhi, while Gādhi's exceptionally glorious son is the great sage Viśwāmitra. (19)

विश्वामिचो महातेजा: पालयामास मेदिदीन्।

बहुवर्षेमहस्वाणि राजा रास्यमकारयत्। 20  ॥

"The highly glorious King Viśwāmitra carried on his administration and ruled over the earth for many thousands of years. (20)

कदाचित् तु महातेजा योजयित्वा वरूधिणीम्।

अश्वीहिणीपरितृतः परिचकाम मेदितीम् ॥ 21  ॥

"Collecting an army and accompanied by an Akṣauhīni (a division consisting of 21,870 elephants, an equal number of chariots, 65,610 horse and 1,09,350 foot), the exceptionally glorious king once went round the globe. (21)

नगराणि च राष्ट्राणि सरितघ्र महापीरिन्।

आश्रमान् क्रमशो राजा विचराजाजगाम हे॥ 22  ॥

वसिष्ठस्याम्पवद् नानापुष्पलतादुमम्।

नानामुगणाकर्णि सिद्धचारणसेवितम् ॥ 23  ॥

"Marching successively across cities and states, rivers and great mountains and hermitages, the king, they say, came to the site of Vasiṣtha's hermitage, rich in flowers, creepers and trees of various kinds, infested with hordes of wild animals of every description, and frequented by Siddhas and Caranas. (22-23)

देवदानवग्रभ्बे: किंनरैरूपशोपितम्

प्रशान्त्रिणाकीर्ण विज्ञसंपिणिवितम् ॥ 24  ॥

"It was graced by the presence of gods, demons, Gandharvas and Kinnaras, abounded in most peaceful deer and was resorted to by flocks of birds. (24)

<table><tr><td>ब्रह्मधिणासंकीर्ण</td><td>देवधिणासेवितम्।</td></tr><tr><td>तपशुणसांसिद्धैरनिकल्येमैहतामधिः</td><td>११ २५ ॥</td></tr><tr><td>सत्तं संकुलं श्रीमद्रह्मकल्येमैहतामधिः।</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>अब्धमेबीवृभक्षेशु श्रीर्णपाणिशनैतसथा ॥ 26  ॥</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>फलमूलाशनैदानैनितिदातेधिंजैनिद्रवैः</td><td>।</td></tr><tr><td>ऋधिधिबालित्यल्प्रेशु जनघहोमपरायणे: ॥ 27  ॥</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>अन्यैवैखानसैर्श्वेच समन्तादुपशोभितम्।</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>वसिष्ठस्याभ्रमपदं ब्रह्मलोकमिवामा ॥ 28  ॥</td><td></td></tr></table>

ददर्शे जयतां श्रेष्ठो विश्वामिभो महाबल: ॥ 28  ॥

“Nay, it was crowded with multitudes of Brāhmaṇa Ṣisīs, visited by batches of celestial sages and incessantly thronged with noble souls accomplished of purpose through the performance of austerities and resplendent as fire, and adorned on all sides with exalted souls vying with the glorious Brahmā (the creator), Ṣisīs living (in some cases) on water or air and (in other cases) on leaves fallen on earth or on fruits and roots alone, nay, who had controlled not only their external senses but their inner sense, the mind, as well and conquered all their weaknesses as well as with the class of Ṣisīs known as the Valakhilyas (so-called because they took their descent from the hair of Brahmā), intent on Japa (the muttering of prayers) and Homa (pouring oblations into the sacred fire), and others, called the Vaikhānasas, who are said to have sprung up from the nails* of Brahmā. The mighty Viśwāmitra, the foremost of the victorious, beheld the aforesaid site of the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha, which was a second Brahmaloka (the realm of Brahmā) as it were. (25-28)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाये बालकारणे एकपश्ठाश: सर्पि: ॥ 51  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-one in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

[Non-Text]

* The Śruti says: ये नखाते वैतानास ये वालाते वालीक्षणाः।

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

हिपढ़ाश: सर्पी:

Canto LII

Vasiṣṭha enjoins his cow of plenty, Śabalā by name, to yield necessary articles for entertaining Viśwāmitra

तं दूद्धा परमप्रीति विश्वामित्रो महावल:।

प्रणतो विनयाद् वीरो वसितं जपतां वरम् ॥ 1  ॥

स्वागतं तव चेल्युक्तो वसिष्ठेन महात्मना।

आसनं चास्य भगवान् वसिष्ठो व्यादिदेश्र ह। 2  ॥

उपविष्यय च तदा विश्वाभिमाय शीमते।

यथान्यायं मुनिवर: फलमूलमुपाहरत्। 3  ॥

“Supremely delighted to behold the celebrated Vasistha, the foremost of those engaged in muttering prayers, the very mighty hero, Viśwāmitra, bowed low to him out of modesty and was greeted by the high-souled Vasistha in the words “Welcome is your advent to this hermitage!” Nay the almighty Vasistha, it is said, offered him a seat; and, when he had taken his seat, the great sage then placed before the learned Viśwāmitra fruits and roots according to the rules of propriety. (1-3)

प्रतिगृहा तु तां पूजां विस्खद्धर राजसतमः।

तपो3निहोशिशोयु कुशलं पर्यपृच्छत ॥ 4  ॥

विश्वामित्रो मृततोजन वन्यस्तिणो गतेत।

सर्वत्र कुशलं प्राह वसिष्ठो राजसतमम् ॥ 5  ॥

"Accepting the hospitality mentioned above from Vasiṣṭha, the exceptionally glorious Viśwāmitra, the foremost of kings, for his part then inquired whether everything was well with his austerities and Agnihotra (worship of the sacred fire) as well as with his pupils and the plant kingdom, the means of their sustenance. In reply to his inquiry Vasiṣṭha told Viśwāmitra, the foremost of kings, that everything was going on well. (4-5)

सुखोपविष्ट राजान विश्वामित्र महातपा:।

प्रप्रछ जपतां श्रेष्ठी वसिष्ठे ब्रहण: सुतः ॥ 6  ॥

"The great ascetic Vasistha, son of

Brahmā (the creator), the foremost of ascetics, questioned the king as follows when he had been comfortably seated : (6)

कम्चिते कुशलं राजन् कम्चिद्ध धर्मेण रझ्यन्।

प्रजा: पालवसे राजन् राजवृत्तेन धार्मिका ॥ 9  ॥

“Is everything well with you, O monarch? Do you rule over the people, O pious king, according to the fourfold course of conduct prescribed for a king, delighting them with your love of righteousness? (7)

किंचिते सम्भुता भृत्वा: किंचित् तिथ्वित्न शासन।

किंचिते विजिता: सर्वे पिचो वीरपुसून १८ ॥

“Are servants duly maintained by you and do they ever stand at your beck and call? Have all your enemies been fully conquered, O destroyer of foes? (8)

किंचित् बलैयु कांग्रेषु मित्रेषु च परंतप।

कुगलं ते नत्यग्र पुरुपौरे तत्थान्य ॥ 9  ॥

“Is all well with your forces, treasuries and allies, O destroyer of foes, no less than with your sons and grandsons, O tiger among men, divorced from sin as you are?” (9)

सर्वत्र कुगलं राजा वसिधं प्रत्युदाहत्।

विश्वामिची महातेजा वसिधं विनयान्वितम् ॥ 10  ॥

"In reply, the exceptionally glorious King Viśwāmitra told Vasistha, the noblest of all and rich in culture, of his allround welfare. (10)

कृत्वा तौ सुचिरं कालं धर्मिष्ठी ता: कथास्तदा ।

मृदा परमया युक्ती प्रीयेतां तो परस्यम् ॥ 1  ॥

"Having carried on all such talks for a very long time on that occasion, and full of supreme joy, the two celebrated and most pious souls felt pleased with each other. (11)

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

tenti váltojó bnyanuk kényaínt eiyunán!

fizgwalizmiudé vakewúyará jírezílllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll

“Then, at the end of the dialogue, O scion of Raghu, the almighty Vasiṣṭha spoke to Viśwāmitra as follows, as though heartily laughing for joy: (12)

आतिथ्यं कतुंमिच्छामि बलस्यास्य महावल।

तव चैवाप्रमेयस्य यथाईं सम्पतीच्छे में ॥ 13 ॥

"I wish to offer hospitality to this distinguished army of yours as well as to your own unfathomable self, according to your dignity, O very mighty king! Please accept it from me. (13)

सक्रियां हि भवानेतां प्रतीच्छतु मया कृताम्।

राजस्वमतिथश्रेष्ठः पूजनीयः प्रयत्नः ॥ 14 ॥

"Receive you this honour done by me, O king, since you are the worthiest of my guests and as such deserve to be zealously honoured by me." (14)

एवमुक्तो वसित्छेन विश्वामिजो महामति:।

कृतमिष्यबीद् राजा पूजावाक्येन मे त्यापि ॥ 15  ॥

Requested thus by Vasiṣṭha, the great-minded King Viśwāmitra, replied as follows: "Honour has been done to me by your very words of hospitality. (15)

फलमूलेन भगवन् विद्यते यत् तताभ्रमे।

पाधोनाचमनीयेन भगवदूरशैनेन चे ॥ 16  ॥

सर्वथा च महापात्र पूजाईण सुपूक्ति:।

नमसेत्र सुत गमिष्यामि मैरेणेशप्रस्य चक्षुषा ॥ 17  ॥

“Duly entertained in everyway by you, who deserve to be honoured by me, O venerable Sir, through fruits and roots that are available in your hermitage and water offered to us for washing our feet and rinsing our mouth with, nay, by your very sight, O highly enlightened soul, I shall now depart. Let my salutation be acceptable to you. Pray, ever regard me with a friendly eye.”

(16-17)

एवं बुवन्ते राजानं वसिष्ठः पुर्णेव हि ।

न्यमन्त्रय धर्मात्मा पुनः पुनरुदारधीः ॥ 18  ॥

The pious and liberal-minded Vasistha actually invited the king once more, even though the latter went on saying like that again and again. (18)

बादमित्येव गाधयो वसिष्ठं प्रत्युवाच ह।

यथा प्रियं भगवततस्थात्मु मुनिपुरिव ॥ 91  ॥

Thereupon Viswámitra, son of Gādhi, they say, replied to Vasisṭha as follows: "All right, let it be as it pleases your venerable self, O jewel among sages!" (19)

एवमुक्त सक्षा तेन वसिष्ठो जपतां वर: ।

आजुहाव ततः प्रीतः कल्याणी धृतकल्याम। 20  ॥

Full of delight, when addressed thus by Viśwāmitra, the exceptionally glorious Vasiṣṭha, the foremost of ascetics, then called in the following words his cow, Śabalā by name (so called because of her spotted colour), that had been washed clean of mud : (20)

एहौहि शबले श्रिपं श्रणु चापि वचो मम ।

सबलस्यास्य राजर्षे: कर्तु व्यवसितो उपम्यदम्।

भोजनेन महहिंण सत्कारं संविधस्त्व मे ॥ 21  ॥

“Come along, pray come soon, O Śabalā, and hear also what I say. I am determined to entertain with a sumptuous repast this Rājarsī Viśwāmitra, alongwith his army. Please get everything ready for me. (21)

यस्य यस्य यथाकामं पडूरसेवधिपूजितम्।

तत् सर्वं कामधूग् दिव्ये अपिवर्षकृते मम ॥ 22  ॥

रसेनारत्रि पानेन लेहुचोयेण संयुतम्।

अत्रानां निचयं सर्वं सृजस्य शबले ल्चर ॥ 23  ॥

"Yield for my sake in desired quantities, O celestial cow of plenty, each one of the six varieties of dishes (viz., pungent, acid, sweet, saline, bitter and alkaline) that may be pleasing to a particular individual, to his heart's content. Look sharp! Produce, O Śabalā, in plenty all kinds of food

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

accompanied by sweetmeats, drinks of various kinds and dishes that can be licked,

such as honey, or sucked, such as the juice of a mango." (22-23)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे हिपुशाशा: सर्प: ॥ 52  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-two in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

विपश्राश: सर्प:

Canto LIII

Heartily entertained alongwith his army by Vasiṣṭṭha with delicious foods and drinks yielded by his cow of plenty, Viśwāmitra asks of him the cow, which Vasiṣṭṭha declines to part with

एवमुक्ता वसिष्ठने शबला शत्रुसूदन।

विदधे कामधुक्क कामान् यस्य यस्योपसते यथा ॥ 1  ॥

इक्षूत् मधूसला लाजान् मैरयांशु वरासवान्।

पानानि च महाहाँगि भध्यांशीचावचानपि ॥ 2  ॥

“Thus instructed by Vasiṣṭha, O destroyer of foes, Śabalā, a cow of plenty, as she was, yielded all luxuries as desired by each particular individual of Viśwāmitra's camp—sugar-canes (including all their products—sugar etc.), honeys of various kinds, even so fried grains of paddy, Maireya (a kind of wine, made of jaggery and other substances) and excellent spirituous liquors distilled from boiled or unboiled sap of sugar-cane, as well as other costly drinks and foods of various kinds, especially those requiring mastication also. (1-2)

उषणाढ्यस्योदन्यस याशय: पर्वतोपमा:।

मृष्टान्यश्रानि सूपांश्र दधिकुल्यास्तथेव च। 3 ।।

नानास्यादुस्मानां च खाण्डवानां तथेव च।

भोजनानि सुर्णणर्नि गौडानि च सहचशर:।। 4 ।।

"In this feast could be seen heaps, as high as mountains, of steaming rice, varieties of sweet rice boiled in milk, nay, pulses boiled into a liquid form with salt and condiments, and even so, streams of curds (as also of milk and ghee), and also silver plates in thousands brimful with delicious fruit juices of various kinds as

well as with sweetmeats. (3-4)

सर्वमासीत् सुस्तुर्ट हृद्यपुटजनायुतम्।

विश्वामित्रबलं राम वसित्ठेन सुतपिंतम् ॥   ॥

"Fully entertained by Vasiṣṭha, O Rāma, the entire army of Viśwāmitra, wholly composed, as it was, of joyous and well-fed men, felt highly gratified. (5)

विश्वामित्रो हि राजर्षेह्रुण्य्टस्तदाभवत्।

सानतःपुर्वरो राजा सन्त्रान्णपुरोहितः ॥ 6  ॥

सामान्यो मन्त्रसहितः सभृच: पूजितस्तदा ।

युक्तः परमहर्षेण वसित्यदिमदब्रबीत् ॥ 7  ॥

"Entertained on that occasion along with the foremost inmates of his gynaecuum as well as with the Brāhmanas (that had accompanied him) including his family priest, and even so with his ministers and counsellors and dependents too, King Visāwmitra, a veritable sage among kings, felt rejoiced and strong." Full of supreme delight he spoke to Vasiṣṭha as follows : (6-7)

पूजितोई त्वया ब्रह्ना, पूजाईण सुसलूकतः ।

श्रूततामधिशास्यामि वावयं वाक्यविशारद।   ॥ ॥

"I have been honoured and sumptuously entertained by you, who are deserving of honour yourself, O holy one! I shall now prefer a request to you, O master of expression; pray, listen! (8)



गरां शतसहचेण दीयांता शबला मम।

रतं हि भगवन्तेत्र रत्हारी च पार्थिव: ॥ 9  ॥

“Šabalā may kindly be handed over to me in exchange for a hundred thousand cows, as she is a jewel and a king is the proper person who ought to receive a jewel. (9)

तसामे शबलां देहि ममैया धर्मतो हित्र।

एवमुक्तसु भगवान् वसिष्ठो मुनिरपुगव: ॥ 10  ॥

विश्वामित्रेण धर्मात्मा प्रत्युवाच महीपतिन्।

नाहं शतसहस्वेण नापि कोटिशतैरंगवाम् ॥ 11  ॥

राजन् दास्यामि शबलों राशिभी रजतस्य वा।

न परित्यागमहैयं मत्सकाशादरिंदम ॥ 12  ॥

"Theforee, make over Sabala to me; she is rightfully mine, O holy Brāhmaṇa!" Thus addressed by Viswāmitra, the almighty Vasistha, the foremost among ascetics, whose mind was given to piety, replied to the king as follows: "I shall never part with Sabalā even in exchange for a thousand million cows, much less for a hundred thousand, nay, not even for heaps of silver coins. She does not deserve to be weaned from my presence, O subduer of foes! (10-12)

शाश्वती शबला महंं कांतिरात्मवती यथा।

अस्यां हव्यं च कव्यं च प्राणयात्रा तथेव च। 13  ॥

आयतमपिन्होत्रे च बलिहांमत्थैव च।

स्वाहाकारवधदकारी विद्याश्रु विविधास्तथा || १४ ||

आयतमम राजर्षे सर्वमैतन संशय: ।

सर्वस्वमैतन् सत्येन मम तुष्टिकरी तथा ॥ 15  ॥

“Sābalā is inalienable from me even as glory is inalienable from a man practising Rajayoga (the methods of mind-control). Moreover, an offering made to the gods in sacrifices and that to the manes in the course of a Śrāddha, as well as the sustenance of my life depends on her. Nay, Agnihotra (daily oblations to the sacred fire), as well as Bali (the offering of a portion of the daily meal to all creatures, also known as Bhūta-Yajña, which consists in throwing

up into the air, near the house-door, morsels of food before taking one's meals), and even so Vaiśwadeva (an offering made to all deities by presenting oblations to the kitchen fire before meals), sacrifices (characterized by the repetition of the indeclinables Swāhā and Vaṣaṭ at the end of the name of the deity to whom an offering is made) and even so, the uttering of the various Mantras inasmuch as the capacity to utter them, rooted as it is in the satisfaction of hunger and bodily strength etc., is derived from the milk of this cow—all this no doubt rests on this cow alone, O royal sage! She is my all as also the source of my delight (through her sight etc.), I say on oath. (13-15)

कारणैबहुभी राजन् न दास्ये शबलां तव।

वसिष्ठनेवमुक्त्सु विश्वामित्रोऋबीन्त् तदा ॥ 96  ॥

संरक्षत्रमत्थर्व वाक्यं वाक्यविशाराद: ।

हेरप्यकक्षत्रीयेयान् सुवर्णणंडुकुशभूषितान् ॥ 17  ॥

ददामि कुज्ञराणां ते सहस्वाणि चतुद्रैश ।

हेरप्यानां रथानां च श्रवेताश्वानां चतुद्रुंजाम् ॥ 18  ॥

ददामि ते शतान्यष्टी किंकिणीकविश्प्रितान् ।

हयानां देशजातानां कुलजानां महौजसाम् ।

सहस्वमेकं दश च ददामि तव सुजत ॥ 19  ॥

नानावगणविभक्तानां ववःस्थानां तथैव च।

ददाग्येकां गवां कोर्टि शबला दीयतां मम ॥ 20  ॥

"For these numerous reasons I shall not give Sabalā to you." Thus addressed by Vasiṣṭha, Viśwāmitra, who was an expert in making out the meaning of words, then made the following reply in a really most importunate tone: "I offer to you fourteen thousand elephants equipped with girths and chains of gold and decked with goads, also of gold. I further offer to you eight hundred gold chariots driven by four white horses each and decorated with small tinkling bells. I shall also give you, O sage of noble vows, eleven thousand highly-spirited horses of excellent breed and born in territories noted for their horses. Over and

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

above these, I shall give you one crore of young cows distinguished by their different colours. Only let Šabalā be given (in exchange for these). (16-20)

यावद्धिच्छिस रत्नानि हित्रयं वा दिजोत्तम।

तावद् ददामि ते सर्वं दीयतां शबला मम ॥ 21  ॥

“Nay, I shall give you without reservation as many jewels and as much gold as you want, O jewel among the twice-born! Let Šabalā be given to me.” (21)

एवमुक्तस्तु भगवान् विश्वामित्रेण धीमतां

न दास्यामिति शबलां प्राह राजन्न कथंचन॥ 22  ॥

Even though solicited thus by the talented Víswāmitra, the almighty Vasisṭha made the same answer: “I shall on no account part with Śabala, O king! (22)

एतदेव हि मे रक्मतेदेव हि मे धनम्।

एतदेव हि सर्वस्यमेतदेव हि जीवितम्॥ 23  ॥

"She is indeed the only jewel in my

possession; nay, she is my only wealth. She alone is really my everything; she alone is my very life. (23)

दर्शश्र शोर्णमासश्य ज्ञाश्रीवासद्धिणा:।

एतदेव हि मे राजन् विविधाश्र क्रियास्तथा ॥ 24  ॥

“She alone is my half-monthly sacrifice performed on the new moon as well as its counterpart, viz., that performed on the full moon, nay, all sacrificial performances concluded with abundant gifts and even so, ritual acts of various kinds, O king! (24)

अतोमृता: क्रिया: सर्वां मरा राजन् न संशयः ।

बहुना किं प्रलापेन न दार्ये कामदोहिनीम् ॥ 25  ॥

"All my religious rites, no doubt, are rooted in her, O king! What is to be gained by prattling a good deal? The long and short of it is that, I shall not part with Sabalā (who yields all my desired objects)." (25)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे जिपश्रास: सर्ग: ॥ 43  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-three in the Balakanda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

चतु:पश्राश: सर्गै:

Canto LIV

On Viśwāmitra attempting to take her away by force, Śabalā seeks to know Vasiṣṭha's mind, and at his instance produces a multitude of warriors that disperse Viśwāmitra's army

कामधेनुं विसष्ठोउपि यदा न त्यजते भूनि:।

तदाय्य शबलां राम विश्वामिझोउ-वकर्षते ॥ 1  ॥

When Sage Vasistha did not consent to part with his wish-yielding cow, O Rāma, Viswāmitra too thereupon proceeded to take Śabālā away by force to his capital. (1)

नीयमाना तु शबला राम राजा महात्मना।

दु:प्रिता चिन्तयामास इन्दती शोककर्शिता ॥ 2  ॥

परित्यन्ता वसिष्ठने किमहं सुमहात्मना ।

याहं राजभूतैदीना हिंदये भूशादु:प्रिता ॥ 3  ॥

Being taken away by force by the mighty king, Śabalā for her part felt afflicted and, distracted with grief, fell a-weeping. She reflected, “Have I been deserted by the exceptionally high-souled Vasiṣṭha, in that I am being taken away in this wretched condition by the king’s retainers, sore distressed as I am? (2-3)

किं मयापकृतं तस्य महर्षेभवितात्यनः ।

यन्मामानगरसं दृष्ट्वा भक्तां त्यजति धार्मिकः ॥ 4  ॥



"What wrong has been done by me to that eminent seer of purified mind that, even though perceiving me to be innocent and devoted to him, the pious soul should abandon me?" (4)

इति संचित्तयिता तु नि:श्वस्य च पुन: पुन: ।

जगाम वेगेन तदा वसिष्ठं परमौजसम् ॥ 5  ॥

Deeply pondering thus and sighing again and again, she for her part forthwith ran to the supremely powerful Vasistha. (5)

निथ्ये तांस्तदा भृत्यान् शतशः शयुसूदन।

जगामान्तिवेशेगेन पादमूलं महात्मन: ॥ 6  ॥

Shaking off the aforesaid retainers numbering many hundred, O destroyer of foes, she at once ran swift as the wind to the soles of feet of that exalted soul. (6)

शबला सा रुदनी च क्लोशनी चेदमब्रवीत्।

वसिष्ठस्याग्रतः स्थिता रुदनी मेघनि:स्वना ॥ 7  ॥

Standing before Vasistha while shedding tears, the celebrated Śabalā submitted to him as follows in a voice sonorous as the rumbling of a cloud, weeping and wailing all the time: (7)

भगवन् किं परित्यका त्वयाहं ब्रहणा: सुत।

यस्माद्र राजभटा मां हि नयते लल्सकाशतः ॥   ॥ ॥

"Have I been forsaken by you, O almighty son of Brahmā, in that the king's servants are actually taking me away from your presence?" (8)

एवमुक्तसु ब्रह्मार्थिरं वचनमब्रवीत्।

शोकसंतमहद्यं स्वसारमिव दुःश्रिततम् ॥ 9  ॥

Questioned thus by the cow, Vasistha, the Brāhmana seer, for his part replied as follows to Śabala, whose heart was tormented with grief, as to an afflicted sister: (9)

न त्वां त्वामि शबले नापि मेउफृतं त्वा।

एष त्वां नयते राजा बलामतो माढालय: ॥ 10  ॥

“I am not abandoning you, O Śabalā, nor have you wronged me. Intoxicated with power, this very mighty king is taking you away. (10)

नहि तुल्यं बलं महं राजा लव्य विशेषतः ।

बली राजा क्षत्रियश्र पृथित्या: पतिरेव च ॥ 11  ॥

"My strength is not equal to his; nay, being my honoured guest, the king is particularly strong today. The king, Viswāmitra, is a Kṣatriya, and the ruler of the earth to boot. (11)

इयम्बहीहिणी पूर्णा गजवाजिरशाकुला।

हसित्धवजसमाकोणां तेनासौ बलवतरः ॥ 12  ॥

"Here is his army, full one Akṣauhini strong, equipped with elephants, horses and chariots and crowded with the best of elephants. In that respect he is mightier than us." (12)

एवमुक्ता वसिष्ठेन प्रत्युवाच विनीतवत्।

वचनं वचनजा सा ब्रह्मांषिमतुलप्रभम् ॥ 13  ॥

Thus addressed by Vasisṭṭha, Śabalā, who correctly understood the sense of others', speech, replied as follows, like a meek lady, to the Brāhmaṇa seer of matchless splendour: (13)

न वर्ल क्षत्रियस्याहुर्जाणा बलवतरा:।

ब्रह्मन् ब्रह्मवलं दिव्यं क्ष्रात्राच्य बलवतरम् ॥ 14  ॥

"The wise declare the strength of a Kṣatriya as nought (as compared to that of a Brāhmaṇa); Brāhmaṇas are decidedly stronger than the Kṣatriyas. The strength of a Brāhmaṇa, O holy one, is spiritual and as such is superior to that of a Kṣatriya.

(14)

अप्रमेयं बलं तुध्यं न तव्या बलवततः।

विश्वामित्रो महावीर्यैतजस्तव दुरासद् ॥ 15  ॥

"Your strength is immeasurable; though very powerful, Viśwāmitra is not stronger in comparison with you. Your glory is unassailable. (15)

नियुड्छ्व मां महातेजस्तव ब्रह्मलसभ्युक्ताम्।

तस्य दर्षे क्यं चल नाशयामि दुरात्मनः ॥ 16  ॥

"Command you me, who, fostered as I am by your Brahmanical (spiritual) strength, O exceptionally glorious sage, shall put an



end to the pride, strength and endeavour of that wretch of a Viśwāmitra." (16)

इत्युक्ति तया राम विस्फडस्तु महायशा: । सुजर्येति तदोवाच बलं परबलादन्न् ॥ 17  ॥

Urged as aforesaid by her, O Rāma, the illustrious Vasisṭṭha for his part forthwith said, “Create a force capable of destroying the enemy’s army.” (17)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा सुराभि: सामुजन्त तद्।

तस्या हुभारवोल्पुटा: पह्वावा: शतशो गुप् ॥ 16  ॥

नाशयन्ति बलं सर्व विश्वामित्रस्य पश्यतः ।

स राजा परमकुब्दः क्रोधविस्कारितक्षण: ॥ 19  ॥

पह्वावान् नाशयामास शाखैरूच्चावचैरपि ।

विश्वामित्रादितान् दृष्ट्वा पह्वावान् शताशस्तदा ॥ 20  ॥

भूय एवासुजद् घोरान् शकान् यवनमिभ्रितान् ।

तैरामीत् संवृता भूमि: शकैर्यवनमिभ्रते: ॥ 21  ॥

प्रभावीद्धमैक्षावौद्यैचिक जल्कसर्पिनपि: |

तैर्यगासिपश्रिश्रधौरेहैमवणांम्बरावृते: ॥ 22  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid command of Sage Vasistha, the said wish-yielding cow forthwith produced a number of warriors. Created by her very bellow, O king, Pahlavas in their hundreds began to destroy the whole army under the very eye of Viswāmitra. Highly

enraged and with his eyes dilated through anger, King Viswāmitra too made short work of the Pahlavas by means of his weapons of various kinds. Seeing the Pahlavas killed in their hundreds by Viswāmitra, Šabalā immediately produced next the terrible Šakas, who were akin to the Yavanas. The land was flooded with these brilliant and most powerful Šakas, that were akin to the Yavanas, resembled the filaments of the Campaka flowers in colour, carried sharp-edged swords and Pattisās (a kind of spear) on their person and were clad in yellow.

(18-22)

निर्देश्यं तद्बलं सर्व प्रदोमैरित पावकैः।

ततोःस्वाणि महातेजा विश्वामित्रो मुमोच ह।

तैस्ते यवनकाम्वोजा बबराश्राकुलीकृताः ॥ 23  ॥

The entire army of Viśwāmitra was consumed by them as by blazing fires. Thereupon, it is said, the highly glorious Viśwāmitra discharged a number of missiles; by them those Yavanas and Kāmbojas (another species of Mlechcas) as well as the Barbaras (still another species of Mlechcas) were thrown into confusion. (23)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये वाल्काण्डे

चतु: पश्रास: सर्ग: ॥ 54  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-four in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.



पञ्चपञ्चाश: सर्ग:

Canto LV

His entire army having been exterminated by the warriors produced by Šabalā and his hundred sons reduced to ashes by the very roar of Vasiṣṭha even as they assailed him, Viśwāmitra retires to the Himalāyas for austerities and, receiving a number of missiles from Lord Šiva, tries them on the inmates of Vasiṣṭha's hermitage; Vasiṣṭha meets him with a mere staff appropriate to a Brāḥmana

ततस्तानाकुलान् दृष्ट्वा विश्वामित्रास्मोहितान्।

वसिष्ठश्रीदयामास कामधूक सृज योगतः ॥ 1  ॥

Seeing the warriors created by Śabalā stupefied by the missiles of Viśwāmitra and fleeing from the battlefield helter-skelter, Vasiṣṭha commanded Śabalā as follows: "Evolve more and more warriors, O wishyielding cow, by dint of your yogic power, power of concentration." (1)

तत्या ईंकारतो जाताः काम्बोजा रविसंनिभाः।

ऊधधश्रा सभूता बर्बरा: शत्सयाणय: ॥ 2  ॥

From her roar sprang up the Kambojas, brilliant as the sun. And, again, from her udders were produced the Barbaras carrying weapons in their hands. (2)

योनिदेशाच्छ यवना: शकुईशाखका: स्मृता:।

रोमकृपेषु म्लेच्छाश्र हारीता: सकिरकातका: ॥ 3  ॥

From her genitals came forth the Yavanas; while those that issued from her anus were known as the Śakas. From the pores of her skin originated the Mlechcas and the Hāritas alongwith the Kirātas. (3)

तैस्तविष्यूदितं सर्वे प्रिश्वामित्रस्य ततक्षणात्।

सपदातितर्जां सास्वं सरर्थ रघुनन्दन ॥ 4  ॥

By them was wiped out instantly the entire army of Viśwāmitra including the foot soldiers and elephants, horses and chariots, O scion of Raghu ! (4)

दृष्ट्वा निषूदितं सेयं वसिधेलं महात्मना।

विश्वरामिसुतानां तु शर्त नानाविधायुम् ॥ 5  ॥

अभ्यधावत् सुसंकूद्रं वसिधं जपतां वरम्।

ईंकारेणैव तान् सर्वान् निर्दंदाह महानुषि: ॥ 6  ॥

Seeing the army of their father exterminated by the mighty Vasisṭha, Viśwāmitra's hundred sons rushed most furiously towards Vasisṭha, the foremost of ascetics, carrying weapons of various kinds. The great Rsi, Vasisṭha, however, reduced them all to ashes by his very roar. (5-6)

ते साश्रवधात्वा वसिष्ठेन महात्मना।

भस्मीकृत मूद्रतैन विश्वामिन्रसुतास्वा ॥ 7  ॥

The sons of Viśwāmitra were reduced to ashes in an instant with their horses, chariots and foot soldiers by the mighty Vasisṭha. (7)

दृष्ट्वा विनाशितान् सर्वान् बलं च सुमहायश: ।

सबीड़े चिन्तयाविष्टो विश्वामित्रो3भवत् तदा ॥   ॥

Seeing them all as well as his army annihilated the exceptionally illustrious Viśwāmitra was forthwith filled with anxiety mixed with shame. (8)

स्मूत्र इव निर्वींगो भग्रद्रंट इकोरा:।

उपरक इवादित्वः सदो निष्पभांतं गतः ॥ 9  ॥

He resembled the ocean that has lost its fury and the snake whose fangs have been broken, and suddenly became lustreless like the eclipsed sun. (9)

हतपुत्रबलो दौनो लूनपक्ष इव द्विजः ।

हतसर्वबलोत्साहो निर्वेदं समपघत ॥ 10  ॥

Having lost his sons and army, he felt

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

miserable like a bird whose wings have been clipped. Nay, with all his strength and spirit shattered, he reached a state of despondency. (10)

स पुत्रमेकं राज्याय पालयेति नियुच्य च

पृथिवीं क्षत्रधर्मेण वनमेवाध्यपद्धता ॥ 11  ॥

Nay, enjoining his only surviving son in the words “Rule the earth according to the moral code prescribed for a Kṣatriya in order to carry on the administration,” he retired to the woods alone. (11)

स गत्वा हिमवल्यशर्षे किंनरोरासेवितम्।

महावेदप्रसाद्धर्षे तपत्सेपे महातपा: ॥ 12  ॥

Repairing to a slope of the Himalayas, resorted to by Kinnaras and Nāgas, Viśwāmitra, who had now turned a great ascetic, practised austerities for the pleasure of Lord Śiva, the Supreme Deity. (12)

केनचित् त्वध कालेन देवेशे वृषधब्जा: ।

दर्शयामास वरदो विश्वामित्र महामुपिन्।। 13  ॥

Some time later Lord Śiva, whose ensign bears the emblem of a bull, the paramount Ruler of gods and the Bestower of boons, actually revealed Himself before the great sage Viśwāmitra and said: (13)

किमर्थ तप्पसे राजन् बृहि यत् ते विवक्षितम्।

वरदोप्रेमि वरी यसे कांक्षितः सोर्पिधधीवानम् ॥ 14  ॥

"Wherefore do you practise austerities, O king? Speak out what is there in your mind. I am the Bestower of boons. The boon which is sought by you may be made known to Me." (14)

एवमुक्तस्तु देवेन विश्वामिजो महातपा:।

प्रपिणप्व महादेवं विश्वामिजोप्रबवीदिदम् ॥ 15  ॥

When the great ascetic, Viśvāmitra, was told thus by the Lord, the former replied to him as follows, falling prostrate before Him: (15)

यदि तुटो महादेव धनुवेदो ममानच।

साङ्गोपाङ्गोपनिषवः सरहस्यः प्रदीयताम् ॥ 16  ॥

"If You are pleased with me, O Supreme

Deity, the science of archery with its inmost secrets, including the branches of knowledge directly or distantly auxiliary to it as also the sacred texts forming part of it may kindly be revealed to me, O sinless One! (16)

यानि देवेषु चाख्याणि दानवेषु महर्षिशु।

ग्रश्वर्यब्रहर्षःसु प्रतिभान्तु ममानघ ॥ 17  ॥

"Let all the mystic missiles that are known to gods, demons and great seers as well as to Gandharvas, Yakṣas and ogres flash before my mind's eye, O sinless One! (17)

तव प्रसादार् भवतु देवदेव ममेप्रिसत्।

एवमरित्विते देदेशेगे वाक्यमुक्ला गतस्तदा ॥ 18  ॥

“Let the consummation sought by me be achieved by Your grace, O God of gods!” Uttering the words “Let it be so,” Lord Śiva, the Supreme Ruler of gods, forthwith departed. (18)

प्राप्य चाख्याणि देलेशाद् विश्वामिभो महाबल: ।

दर्पेण महता युक्तो दर्पेपूर्णोंभवत् तदा ॥ 19  ॥

विवधीमानो वीर्यैण समूद्र इत वर्षिण ।

इतं मेने तदा राम वसिष्ठमृषिसतमम् ॥ 20  ॥

"Receiving the mystic missiles and weapons from Lord Śiva, the paramount Ruler of gods, the very mighty Viśwāmitra, who was already full of great pride, was now puffed up with arrogance; and swelling with power as the ocean on the full moon, he took Vasiṣṭha, the foremost of seers, to be dead at that moment, O Rāma. (19-20)

ततो गत्वा५प्रभपदं मुमोचास्वागी पार्थिवः ।

शैस्तत् तपोवर्त नाम निर्देशं चास्त्वतेजसा ॥ 11  ॥

"Proceeding to the site of the hermitage, the king then discharged mystic missiles and weapons, by which the said grove in which austerities were being practised began to be consumed through the fire of the missiles. (21)

उद्वीर्यमाणमस्तं तद्विशामित्रस्य धीमतः ।

दृष्ट्वा विप्रद्रुता भीता मुन्यः शतगोदि दिशः ॥ 22  ॥

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

"Alarmed to see those missiles being discharged by the talented Viśwāmitra, the hermits escaped in their hundreds in various directions. (22)

वसिष्ठस्य च ये शिष्णा ये च वे मृगपक्षिणः।

विद्रवति भयात् भीता नानादिरभ्यः सहस्यः ॥ 23  ॥

"Afraid of the danger, whatever pupils of Vasistha and whatever beasts or birds there were in his hermitage fled in their thousands from the various quarters. (23)

वसिष्ठस्याममदतं शून्यमासीमहात्मन:।

मुहृतंमिव नि:शब्दमासीद्वीरिणसंनिभम् ॥ 24  ॥

वदतो वै वसिष्ठस्य मा भेरिति मुहुर्दुः ।

नाशयाम्य हायेयं नीहारमिव भास्कतः ॥ 25  ॥

"The site of the hermitage of the mighty Vasıştha turned desolate. In an hour or so it became noiseless and looked barren as it were in spite of Vasıştha repeatedly calling out: 'Don't be afraid, I shall presently make short work of Viśwāmitra, the son of Gādhi,

as the sun dispels fog.' (24-25)

एवमुक्त्वा महातेजा वसिडो जपतां वर: ।

विश्वामित्र नतदा वात्वं सरोषमिदमब्रवीत्।। 26  ॥

"Saying so, the exceptionally glorious Vasīṣṭha, the foremost of ascetics, then angrily addressed the following words to Viśwāmitra: (26)

आश्रमे विरसेवुद्धे यद् विनाशितवानसि ।

दुराचारो हि यन्मूदस्तस्मात् त्वं न भविष्यसि ॥ 21  ॥

“Since you have made havoc of my hermitage, fostered for long, and inasmuch as you are a wicked fool, you will cease to be what you are.” (27)

इत्युक्त्वा परमकुब्जी दूणडमुध्यम सत्वर:।

विधूम इव कालाप्रियंमदण्डमिवामरम् ॥ 26  ॥

"Saying so and hurriedly lifting a staff, which looked like another rod of Yama, Vasiṣṭha stood highly enraged like the smokeless fire raging at the time of universal destruction." (28)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पत्रपञ्चास: सर्ग: ॥ 55  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-five in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

घटूपऋाश: सर्ग:

Canto LVI

With his Brahmanical staff alone Vasisṭha renders ineffectual all the mystic missiles discharged by Viswāmitra, whereupon the latter condemns military strength and makes up his mind to practise austerities with a view to attaining Brahmanhood

एवमुक्तो वसिष्ठेन विश्वामिगो महाबल: ।

आग्रेयमस्मृद्धिश्व तिष्ठ तिष्ठेति चाब्बनीत् ॥ 9  ॥

Aiming a missile presided over by the god of fire, when challenged as aforesaid by Vasīṣtha, the very mighty Viśwāmitra said, “Stay awhile ! Wait a bit !!” (1)

ब्रह्मदर्षे समुहाय्य कालादण्डीविपापम्।

वसिष्ठो भगवान् कोशधादिं वचनमब्रवीत् ॥ 2  ॥

Steadily uplifting his Brahmanical staff, which looked like another rod of Yama, the almighty Vasīṣtha angrily spoke as follows :

(2)

क्षत्रबन्धो स्थितो उस्येय यद् बलं तद् विदर्शय।

नाशयामध्य ते दर्प शस्यस्य तव गाधिज ॥ 3  ॥

"Here I stand, O unworthy Kṣatriya! Pray, exhibit whatever might you possess;

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

I shall crush your pride as well as the pride of your weapons today, O son of Gādhi!

(3)

क्व च ते क्षत्रियबलं क्व च क्रद्धबलं महत्।

पश्य क्रद्धबलं दिट्यं मम क्षत्रियपांसन ॥ 4  ॥

"Of what account is your martial strength when compared to the great power of a Brāhmana? Behold my divine Brahmanical power, O disgrace to the Kṣatriyas!" (4)

तस्यासं गाधिपुत्रस्य घोरमाधोयमुतमम्।

ब्रहादुपडेन तच्छानतमप्रेबैग इवाधभसा ॥ 5  ॥

That terrible and excellent missile presided over by the god of fire and hurled by the celebrated son of Gādhi was neutralized by the Brahmanical staff of Vasiṣṭha, as the fury of a fire is counteracted by water. (5)

वाक्णं चैव रौईं च रौईं पाशुप्तं तथा।

ऐपीकं चापि चिश्वेप कुपितो गाधिनन्दन: ॥ 6  ॥

The enraged son of Gādhi discharged a missile presided over by Varunā, the god of water, as well as another presided over by Rudra (the god of destruction), nay, a third presided over by Indra (the ruler of gods) and a fourth presided over by Lord Śiva (the Protector of the Jiva, which has been likened to a beast because of its bondage) as also the one made of a reed. (6)

मानवं मोहनं चैव गाधर्वं स्वापनं तथा।

जूर्षपर्ग मातून चैव संतापनविलापने ॥ 7  ॥

शोषपं दारणं चैव वत्रमसं सुदुर्जनम्।

ब्रह्मापां कालापशं वाकर्ण पापामेव च ॥ 8  ॥

पिनाकमस्तं द्यितं शुक्राकरं अशगती तथा ।

दरुडास्तमथ पैशाचं क्रीडामस्तं तथैव च ॥ 9  ॥

धर्मचकं कालचकं विष्णूचकं तथैव च।

वायवं मथनं चैव अस्तं ह्वशिरस्तथा ॥ 10  ॥

शक्तिद्वयं च चिक्षेप कक्रूलां मुसलं तथा।

वैद्याधरं महासं च कालास्वमथ दाकृणम् ॥ 11  ॥

निशूलमसं घोरं च कापालमथ कक्रणम्।

एतान्यस्वाणि चिक्षेप सर्वाणि रघुनन्दन ॥ 12  ॥

वसिष्ठे जपातो श्रेष्ठे तददपुर्मिवाभवत्।

तानि सर्वाणि दण्डेन ग्रस्ते ब्रहणः सुतः ॥ 13  ॥

He then hurled, O scion of Raghu, at Vasistha, the foremost of ascetics, all the following missiles—the one presided over by Swayambhuva Manu, as also another possessing the virtue of stupefying the person aimed at, another presided over by Gandharvas, even so, a missile inducing sleep, another that induces yawning, still another that inebriates the person against whom it is directed, as well as a couple of missiles that severally torment by heating and melt the object aimed at, still another that dries up (by sucking its moisture), as well as a missile that rends the object aimed at, a missile presided over by Indra's thunderbolt—a missile which is so very difficult to prevail against—a missile presided over by Brahmā's noose, another presided over by the noose of Kāla, the god of death, as well as a missile presided over by the noose of Varuna, the missile known by the name of Pināka, beloved of Lord Śiva, also the two kinds of Indra's thunderbolts, dry as well as wet, a missile presided over by Yama (the god of punishment), another presided over by Pisācas (fiends) as well as a missile presided over by Krauñca (the name of a mountain), the missiles presided over by the discusses of Dharma, the god of virtue, Kāla (the Time-Spirit), as well as of Viṣṇu, as also a missile presided over by the wind-god, another that kills by churning, and the one presided over by Lord Hayagriva, a manifestation of Lord Viṣṇu credited with the head of a horse, the two kinds of javelins, the missiles known by the names of Karkāla and Musala, the great missile presided over by Vidyādharas (heavenly artistes) and then the terrible missile presided over by Kāla (the god of death), nay, the fearful missile popularly known as the trident and the missiles known by the names of Kapāla and Kankana. The wonder of it, however, was that Vasiṣṭha (a son of Brahma) neutralized them all by means of his staff alone. (7-13)

तेषु शान्तेषु ब्रह्मास्त्र क्षिसवान् गाधिनन्दनः ।

तदस्यमुचतं दृष्ट्या देवा: साधिपुरोगमाः । 14 ।

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

دېغىزىشىمىزىمىزىمىزىمىزىمىزىمىزىمىزىمىزىمىزىمەن

The aforesaid missiles having been rendered ineffectual, Viśwāmitra (son of Gādhi) discharged Brahmāstra, a missile presided over by Brahmā, the creator. The gods with the god of fire as their leader, the celestial sages and Gandharvas along with eminent Nāgas were struck with awe to see that missile ready for being hurled. Nay, all the three worlds were alarmed when the said missile presided over by Brahmā was fully discharged. (14-15)

तद्यस्तं महाधौरं ब्राह्मं ब्राह्मण तेजसा।

वसिष्ठो प्रसते सर्वं ब्रह्मदण्डेन राघव॥ 16  ॥

Vasiṣṭha, however, neutralized even that exceptionally terrible Brahmāstra in its entirety, including all its limbs, by his Brahmanical staff combined with the Brahmanical (spiritual) glory, O scion of Raghu ! (16)

ब्रह्मासं प्रसमानस्य वसिष्ठस्य महात्मन:।

त्रैलोक्यमोहनं रौरं रूपमासीत् सुदारुणम् ॥ 17  ॥

While the mighty Vasistha was consuming the Brahmastra, he assumed a most violent and fierce aspect that stupefied all the three worlds. (17)

रोमकृपि सर्वेषु वसिष्ठस्य महात्मन:।

मरीच इव निष्येतुरप्रैधमाकुलाधिच: ॥ 18  ॥

From all the pores of skin of the high-souled Vasistha shot forth like as many rays, tongues of fire enveloped in smoke (the smoke issuing from the extinguished Brahmāstra). (18)

प्राज्यलद् ब्रह्मण्डघ्र वसिष्ठस्य करोक्षतः।

विश्यम इव कालाग्रैयमदण्ड इवापर: ॥ 19  ॥

Even the Brahmanical staff raised in the hand of Vasistha blazed forth like the

smokeless fire of universal destruction or like a second rod of Yama (the god of punishment). (19)

ततोउस्तुवन् मुर्निगणा वसिधं जपतां वरम्।

अमोघं ते बलं ब्रह्मलेजो धारय तेजसा ॥ 20  ॥

Thereupon hosts of sages glorified as follows Vasistha, the foremost of ascetics: "Unfailing is your might, O holy one! Quench the fire of your person as well as of the Brahmanical staff by your own glory. (20)

निगृहीतस्वया ब्रह्ना विश्वामिचो महाबल:।

अमोधे चे तवं श्रेष्ठ लोका: सन्तु गतवध्याः ॥ 21  ॥

"The very mighty Viśwāmitra has been tamed by you, O holy Brāhmaṇa! Your power knows no failure, O noblest soul! Let the worlds be rid of their agony." (21)

एवमुक्तो महातेजा: शर्म बढ़े महाबल: ।

विश्वामित्रा विनिकृतो विनि:श्वस्येदमब्रवीत् ॥ 2  ॥

Prayed to in these words, the exceptionally glorious and mighty Vasistha regained his natural calm; and, heaving a deep sigh, the worsted Viswāmitra spoke as follows: (22)

धिन्गू बलं क्षत्रियबलं बढ्रातेजोबलं बलम्।

एकेन ब्रदादुष्टेन सर्वास्राणि हतानि मे ॥ 23  ॥

"Reproachful is the might of a Kṣatriya. Even so, the strength proceeding from the glory of a Brāhmana is real strength. All my missiles stand neutralized by a single Brahmanical staff." (23)

तदेतत् प्रसमीक्ष्याहं प्रसर्जैन्ध्यमानस: ।

तपो महत् समास्थायर्य यद् वै ब्रहात्वकारणम् ॥ 24  ॥

Clearly perceiving this superiority of Brahmanical glory, therefore, I shall with my senses and mind purified undertake severe austerities that will enable me to attain Brahmanhood in this very life." (24)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्याकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे घटपशास: सर्ग: ॥ 56  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-six in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.



ससपऊबाश: सर्गे:

Canto LVII

Viswāmitra embarks on a severe course of austerities with a view to attaining Brahmanhood. In the meantime, King Triśanku of Ayodhyā requests Vasistha to conduct for him a sacrifice which may enable him bodily to ascend to heaven and, on Vasistha declining to comply with his request, approaches his sons for the same purpose

ततः संतमहुदयः स्मरत्रिग्रहमात्मनः ।

विनिः:श्वस्य विनिः:श्वस्य कृतवैरो महात्मना ॥ 9  ॥

स दक्षिणां दिशं गत्वा महिष्या सह रायव।

तताप परम घोर विश्वामित्र महाताप: ॥ 2  ॥

Sighing deeply again and again, his heart being distressed at the thought of his discomfiture at the hands of Vasistha, the celebrated Viśwāmitra, who had made enemies with an exalted soul like Vasistha then proceeded to the southern quarter with his principal queen and embarked as a great ascetic on a course of most severe austerities, O scion of Raghu ! (1-2)

फलमूलाशगो दानतश्वार परमं तप:।

अश्रय जजीरे पुगा: सत्यधर्मपरायणा: ॥ 3  ॥

हविष्यन्दी मधुष्पन्दो दृढंनेगो महारश: ।

पूर्णे वर्षसहसे तु ब्रह्मा लोकपितमाह: ॥ 4  ॥

अग्रवीभयूरं वाक्यं विश्वामित्रं तपोधानम्।

जिता राजर्धिलोकास्ते तपसा कुशिकालमज ॥ 5  ॥

Living on fruits and roots alone and with his mind and senses fully controlled, he practised austerities of a high order. Immediately after his commencing the course of his austerities were born to him four sons devoted to truthfulness and virtue—Havispanda, Madhuspanda, Drghanetra and Mahāratha by name. On the completion of a thousand years Brahmā (the progenitor of the universe) actually appeared and addressed the following sweet words to Viśwāmitra, who was rich in asceticism: "The worlds attained by royal sages have

been won by you through askesis, O son of Kuśika (Gādhi)! (3-5)

अनेन तपसा लयं हि राजर्धिरिति विद्यहै।

एवमुक्ल्वा महातेजा जगाम सह दैवतेः ॥ 6  ॥

त्रिविष्टपं ब्रहालोकं लोकानां परमेश्वरः ।

विश्वामित्रोप्रि तच्छुला हिंया किंचिद्वाब्कुएवः ॥ 7  ॥

दुःखेन महताविष्टः सम्यानुरिदम्बबीत्।

तपश्र सुमहत् तमं राजर्षितिति मां विदुः ॥ 8  ॥

देवा: सर्पिणगा: सर्वे नास्ति मन्ये तपः फलम्।

एवं निश्रित्य मनसा भूय एव महातपाः ॥ 9  ॥

तपश्रचार धर्मात्मा काकुत्थ परमात्मवान्।

एतस्मिवे व काले तु सत्यवादी जितन्द्रियः ॥ 10  ॥

शिशड्कुरिति विश्वात् इक्ष्वाकुकुलवधन्: ।

तस्य बुद्धिः: समुपत्रा यजेयमिति पश्चव ॥ 11  ॥

गछ्धेयं स्वशरीरिण देखतानां परां गतिम् ।

वसितं स समाहुक कथयामास विभिततम् ॥ 12  ॥

"Through these askesis we undoubtedly recognize you as a royal sage." Saying so, the exceptionally glorious Brahma, the suzerain lord of all the worlds, returned along with the gods (that had accompanied him) to paradise (Indra's heaven) en route to Brahmaloka, the highest heaven, his own realm.

Filled with great agony to hear the aforesaid compliment and with his face downcast a bit through shame, Viśwāmitra too spoke to himself in a mood of dejection as follows: 'Even though most severe austerities have been practised by me, all the gods including the hosts of Ṣisis recognize

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

me only as a royal sage and not as a Brâhmana as desired by me. I, therefore, think that Brahmanhood is not the reward for my austerities (something more is required for attaining the status of a Brâhmana).' Having concluded thus in his mind, the great ascetic, Viswâmitra, whose mind was given to piety, O scion of Kakustha, and who was of great restraint, commenced his austerities anew.

At this very time a king who heightened the glory of Ikswāku's race and was widely known by the name of Triśanku, nay, who ever spoke the truth and had fully controlled his senses, took it into his head, O scion of Raghu, to undertake a sacrifice and thereby ascend bodily to paradise, the highest realm of gods. Summoning Vasiṣṭha, he revealed his mind to him.

(6-12)

अश्वयमिति चायुक्तो वसित्ठने महात्मना।

प्रत्याख्यातो वसित्ठने स ययो दक्षिणां दिशम॥ 13  ॥

He was, however, told by the mighty Vasiṣṭha that it was not possible to conduct such a sacrifice. Repulsed by Vasiṣṭha, he proceeded to the southern quarter. (13)

ततस्तकर्मसिद्धार्थ पुत्रांस्तस्य गतो नृप:।

वारिष्ठा दीर्थतपस्पतो यय रि हेतरेपि १४।।

For the accomplishment of the said purpose the king then sought Vasiṣṭha's sons at the place where they were actually leading an austere life, engaged as they were in a prolonged course of austerities.

(14)

त्रिशड्कुस्तु महातेजा: शर्ते परमभार्वलम्।

वसिष्ठपुत्रान् ददुशे तथ्यमानान् मनस्विनः ॥ 15  ॥

The exceptionally glorious Triśanku beheld from a distance the hundred high-minded and supremely resplendent sons of Vasisṭha practising austerities. (15)

सोअभाय्य महात्मानः सर्वानि गुरोः सुतान्।

अभिवादानुपूर्वेनि हृथा किंचिदवाङ्मुखः ॥ 16  ॥

अज्वीत् स महात्मानः सर्वानेव कृताज्ञलि:।

शरणं वः प्रपत्रोड़ं शरणयान् शरणं गत: ॥ 17  ॥

Approaching and greeting in order of seniority all the high-souled sons of Vasistha (his family preceptor) with his face downcast a bit through shame on his having been repulsed by his preceptor, he submitted with folded hands to all those exalted souls as follows: “Though resorted to by others as a protector, I have sought you as my refuge, capable as you are of affording protection to others. (16-17)

प्रत्याक्ष्यातो हि भयं वो वासिछेन महात्मना।

यदुकामो महायजं तदनुज्ञातुमहैथ ११८॥

"May God bless you! Though refused by the high-souled Vasiṣṭha, your father, I am still desirous of performing a great sacrifice with the object of bodily ascending to heaven. Be pleased, therefore, to grant me leave to do so. (18)

गुरूपुत्रानहं सर्वान् नमस्कृत्य प्रसादये।

शिरसा प्रणतो याचे ब्राहूणांतसपसि स्थितान् ॥ 11  ॥

"Saluting all my preceptor's sons, I hereby seek your favour and, fallen prostrate touching the ground with my head, I implore the Brāhmanas in your person, devoted to austerities. (19)

ते मां भवन्तः सिद्धार्थ याजयन्तु समाहिताः।

सशरीतो यथाहं वै देवलोकमावानुयाम् ॥ 20  ॥

"As such may you help me with a concentrated mind in performing a sacrifice for the accomplishment of my purpose so that I may attain to the realm of gods in my embodied state. (20)

प्रत्याख्यातो वसिष्ठने गतिमन्यां तपोधानाः ।

गुरुपुज्ञाते सर्वान् नाहं पश्यामि कांचान ॥ 21  ॥

“Having been repulsed by Vasistha, O sages rich in asceticism, I do not find any resort other than you all, the sons of my preceptor. (21)

इक्षवाकृणां हि सर्वेषां पुरोधाः परम गाति: । तस्मादन्तरं सर्वे भवन्तो दैवतं मम ॥ 22  ॥

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

"The family priest, in the person of Vasiṣṭha, indeed has been the supreme

resort to all the scions of Ikṣwāku. Next to him you all are a deity to me." (22)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंये आदिकाव्ये बालकार्ते ससपझाश: सर्पि: १५७ ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-seven in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

अष्टपञ्चाश: सर्ग:

Canto LVIII

Having been repulsed by Vasistha's sons as well, Trísanku gets ready to seek another priest, whereupon he is degraded by the curse of Vasistha's sons to the position of a Cāndāla and approaches Viswāmitra with the same request

ततस्विश्रज्ञेवंचनं श्रुता क्रोधसम्पित्वतम्।

श्रविपूजसतं राम राजानामिदमब्रवीत् ॥ 1  ॥

Filled with rage to hear the submission of Trísanku, O Rāma, the hundred sons of sage Vasisṭha forthwith replied to the king as follows: (1)

प्रत्याख्यातोर्सि दुपैशो गुरुणा सत्यवादिता ।

तं कर्थं समतिकम्य शाखानतमुपेयिवान् ॥ 2  ॥

"When you have been repulsed by your preceptor, Sage Vasīṣṭha, who always speaks the truth, O foolish king how have you sought another patron, ignoring him?"

(2)

इक्ष्वाकृणां हि सर्वैंपा पुरोधाः परमा गति: ।

न वातिकमितुं शक्यं वचनं सत्यवादिनः ॥ 3  ॥

"The family priest, Sage Vasistha, has been the greatest support of all the scions of Ikswāku and the word of that veracious sage cannot be set aside with impunity. (3)

अशक्यमिति सोवाच वसिष्ठो भगवानृषि: ।

तं वयं वै समाहृतं क्रतुं शक्ता: कर्थंचन ॥ 4  ॥

"How can we really venture to conduct a sacrifice which the celebrated and almighty sage Vasīṣṭha has declared as something which cannot be undertaken? (4)

बालिशस्तं नरप्रेष्ठ गयन्तां स्वपुरं पुनः ।

याजने भगवान् शक्तस्वेलोकवस्यापि पार्थिव ॥ 5  ॥

"You are yet puerile of understanding, O jewel among men! Return, therefore, to your capital. The supremely glorious Vasistha is even capable of conducting the sacrifices of all the three worlds, O ruler of the earth! (5)

अवमानं कर्थं कर्तुं तस्य शश्यामहे वयम्।

तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा कोधायपालुकाग्रभम् ॥ 6  ॥

स राजा पुरनेवैतानिदं वचनमब्रवीत्।

प्रत्याख्यातो भगवता गुरुपूरैतथैव हिं ॥ 9  ॥

अन्यां गतिं गमिथ्यामि स्वस्ति वोउस्तु तपोधानः ।

त्रशिपुग्रास्तु तच्छुत्वा वाक्यं घोराधिसंहितम् ॥ 6  ॥

शेषुः परमसंकुब्द्राक्षण्डलालं गमिथ्यसि ।

इत्युक्वता ते महात्मानो विविशुः स्वं स्वामाभ्रमम् ॥ 9  ॥

"How shall we be able to offer indignity to him by embarking on a venture which has been declared by him as something which cannot be taken in hand?" Hearing the aforesaid admonition of Vasiṣṭha's sons, couched as it was in words full of anger, the said king, however, once more made the following submission to them: "I have actually been repulsed by the venerable Vasiṣṭha and even so by you, my preceptor's sons. I shall accordingly approach another

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

patron. God bless you, O sages rich in askesis!" Highly enraged to hear the aforesaid submission, revealing as it did his terrible design of disregarding Vasiṣṭha and thereby courting disaster, Vasiṣṭha's sons for their part cursed him in the following words: "You shall descend to the state of a Candāla (an outcaste of the lowest grade)!" Saying so, those exalted souls retired each to his own hermitage. (6-9)

अथ रात्यां व्यतीतायां राता चण्डलालां गतः ।

नीलवस्वधरो नील: पुरुषो ध्यस्तमूर्षः॥ 10  ॥

त्रिव्यमाल्यांरागश्रु आवसाधरगो३भवत् ।

तं दृष्ट्या मन्निण: सर्वे त्यन्य चण्डालरूपिणम् ॥ 11  ॥

प्रार्वत् सहिता राम पौरा येउस्यानुपामिनः ।

एको हि राजा काकुत्थ जगाम परमात्मवान् ॥ 12  ॥

दह्यामानो दिव्यारत्रं विश्वामित्रं तपोधनम् ।

विश्वामित्रस्तु तं दृष्ट्या राजानं विफलीकृतम् ॥ 13  ॥

चण्डालरूपिणं राम मुनि: कारणयमानतः ।

कारुपयात् स महातेजा वाक्यं परमधार्मिकः ॥ 14  ॥

इदं जगाद भद्रं ते राजानं घोरदर्शनम् ।

किमागमनकायँ ते राजपूत्र महाक्वल ॥ 15  ॥

अयोध्याधिपते वीर शापाच्छण्डालतां गतः ।

अथ तद्वावयमाकपयं राजा चण्डालतां गतः ॥ 16  ॥

अज्वीत् प्राझलिवर्षकं वायक्यो वायवकोविदम् ।

प्रत्याख्यातोर्सि मुरणा गुरुपुत्रैस्तथैव च ॥ 17  ॥

As soon as the night passed, the king was reduced to the state of a Caṇḍala. Turning black in complexion, he found himself clad in black (the very yellow silk wrapped round his loins having turned black) and his long hair fallen off, the garland decking his person having turned into garlands of flowers grown in a crematorium and the cosmetics with which it was anointed into a coat of ashes from the same unholy place, and the

gold and be-jewelled ornaments on his person having turned into those of iron*. Seeing him changed into the form of a Caṇḍala, all his counsellors as well as the citizens that had followed him to the hermitages of his preceptor's sons, O Rāma, ran away in a body deserting him. Extremely self-possessed, though burning with agony day and night, O scion of Kakuttha, the king went all alone to Viśwāmitra, whose only wealth now was his asceticism. Viśwāmitra, who was now living as a hermit, O Rāma, was moved to pity at the very sight of the king, who had not only been frustrated but transformed into a Caṇḍala. Out of compassion the exceptionally glorious and supremely pious Viśwāmitra spoke to the king, who had assumed a frightful aspect, as follows: "May all be well with you! What is the object of your visit, O mighty prince, O valiant ruler of Ayodhyā, reduced as you are to the state of a Caṇḍala through a curse?"

Hearing the question of Viśwāmitra, the king, who knew the art of speaking, even though reduced to the state of a Caṇḍala, forthwith spoke as follows with folded hands to Viśwāmitra, who was a master of expression: “I have been repulsed by my preceptor, Sage Vasistha, and even so, by my preceptor’s sons. (10-17)

अनवार्थेव ते कामं मया प्रापो विषययेः ।

सर्गरीरे दिवं यायामिति मे सौम्यदर्शनं ॥ 16  ॥

मया चेच्टं क्रतुर्शतं तच्च नावायते फलम् ।

अनुतं नोक्तपूर्व मे न च वक्ष्ये कदाचन ॥ 19  ॥

“Even without attaining that object of my desire a contrary result has been met with by me. In fact, a hundred sacrifices

* This shows that the Varna or grade of society in which one is born cannot be altered by mere change of avocation as is now alleged by some modern critics. The change is brought about only by one's good or evil Karma or by the will of another powerful soul ordinarily in a future life but in exceptional circumstances even in one's current life as in the present case or in the case of Visvāmitra as will be shown hereafter. It further shows that such a change transforms not only one's appearances but the very constituents of one's body. This was, however, clearly evidenced only at a time when the rules of Varnāśrama were strictly followed and enforced by the ruling authority.

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

were intended to be performed by me in order that I might ascend bodily to heaven, O sage of pleasing aspect! But neither is that consummation (in the shape of my being able to perform a hundred sacrifices) attained by me nor the reward sought by me in the shape of my being translated to heaven. No untruth has ever been uttered by me in the past nor shall I ever tell a lie in future even when reduced to straits, O good Sir! I swear by my allegiance to the duties of a Kṣatriya. Worship has been offered by me to God through sacrificial performances of various kinds and people have been governed with righteousness.

(18-19)

कृष्छेख्यपि गतः सौम्य क्षत्रधर्मेण ते शरेपे।

यज्रैवह्विवेशिष्टं प्रजा धर्मेण पालितना: ॥ 20  ॥

गुर्वश्र महात्मयानः शीलवृत्तेन तोषिता: ।

धर्मे प्रवतमानस्य यजं चाह्तुमिच्छ्न: ॥ 21  ॥

परितोषं न गच्छन्ति गुरवो मुपिनुपाला ।

दैवमेव परं मन्ये पौक्षं तु निरर्थकम् ॥ 22  ॥

“Nay, the elders no less than exalted souls have been gratified through my good qualities and right conduct. My preceptors,

however, did not derive satisfaction through me even though I strove hard in the cause of righteousness and sought to undertake a sacrifice in order to be able to attain to heaven in my physical body, O jewel among sages! I, therefore, reckon fate alone as supreme and personal effort as of no avail when matched against fate. (20-22)

दैर्वेनाकम्पते सर्वं दैर्वे हि परमा गति:।

तस्य मे परमात्रैव प्रसादमर्भिकांक्षतः।

कतुर्महींस भई ते दैवोपहतकर्मणे: ॥ 23  ॥

"Everything else is thrown into the background by fate. Indeed, destiny is the highest refuge. Be pleased, therefore, to extend your grace to me, who eagerly long for it, sure afflicted as I am, all my effort, having been counteracted by an evil destiny. May God bless you! (23)

नान्यां गर्ति गमिष्यामि नान्यब्छरणमस्ति मे।

देवं पुरुषबकरेण निवर्तीयतुमर्हसि ॥ 24  ॥

“I shall seek no other shelter; in fact, there is no other asylum for me. Be good enough to avert my evil destiny through personal effort.” (24)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंये आदिकाव्ये

बालकाण्डेउद्यपश्रास: सर्प: ॥ 58  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-eight in the Bálakāndā of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

एकोनषिट्तम: सर्गै:

Canto LIX

Viswāmitra assures Triśanku of his help, sends word to a number of sages, inviting them to conduct a sacrifice for Triśanku, and pronounces a curse on those who decline to come

उक्तावक्यं तु राजानं कृपया कृशिकात्मजः ।

अज्वीर्मधुरं वायकं साक्षाच्छण्डलातं गतम् ॥ 1  ॥

Viśvāmitra, the son of Gādhi, kindly gave the following suave reply to the king, Tríśańku, who had actually been reduced to

the state of a Caṇḍala, when he had finished his say : (1)

इश्वाको स्वागतं वत्स जानामि त्वां सुधार्थिमम्।

शरणं ते प्रदास्यामि मा भेथीनपुरंगव ॥ 2  ॥

"Welcome is your visit to my hermitage,

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

O scion of lkswaku! I know you to be exceedingly pious, my child! I shall afford shelter to you; don't be afraid, O jewel among kings! (2)

अहमामन्चे सर्वान् महर्शीन् पुण्यकर्मपंगः।

यज्ञसाहुकरान् राजसंततो यक्ष्यसि निर्वृतः ॥ 3  ॥

"I shall presently send word to all great Risos of virtuous deeds, who will help you in the performance of a sacrifice intended to be undertaken by you, O king! Then you will prosecute your sacrificial undertaking at ease. (3)

गुरुशापकृतं रूपं यदिदं त्वयि वर्तैतं।

अनेन सह रूपेण सशरीरो गमिष्यसि ॥ 4  ॥

"You will bodily ascend to heaven in this very form, which now stands inflicted on you by the curse of your preceptor in the form of his sons. (4)

हस्तप्रासमहं मन्ये स्वर्ग तव नराधिप।

यस्तं कौशिकमागमय शरणरं शरणागत: ॥ 5  ॥

"I consider heaven as already attained by you, O ruler of men, in that having sought the presence of Viswāmitra, son of Kuśika, i.e., myself, you have come for protection to one who is capable of affording shelter to those who need it." (5)

एवमुक्वता महातेजाः पुत्रान् परमथार्थिकान्।

व्यादिरेश महाप्राज्ञान् यज्ञसभाकरणान् ॥ 6  ॥

Saying so, the exceptionally glorious Viśwāmitra commanded his supremely pious and highly intelligent sons to make preparations for a sacrifice. (6)

सर्वान् शिष्यान् समाहूय वाक्यमेतुद्वाच् श्।

सर्वानुशीन् सवासिध्वानानयखं ममाज्ञा ॥ 7  ॥

सशिष्यान् सुहृद्धुश्व सल्विजः सुबहुश्रुतान् ।

यदन्यो वचनं बूयामन्न्वयवलाचोदितः ॥ 8  ॥

तत् सर्वभखिलेनेकी ममाख्येयमनावून्तम्।

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुला दिशो जमुस्तद्धाजा ॥ 9  ॥

Summoning all his dependents, so the tradition goes, he gave the following instructions to them : "Under my orders bring

here all the Rşis, including the sons of Vasisṭha, as well as their realtions well-versed in a good many subjects, alongwith their pupils and priests capable of officiating at a sacrifice. If anyone who is summoned on the strength of my word or anyone else makes any disparaging observation, all those remarks should be reproduced to me in their entirety." Hearing the aforesaid order of Viśwamitra, his followers proceeded in various directions under his command.

(7-9)

आजम्पृथ त्रेशेभ्य: सर्वेभ्यो ब्रह्माविदान: ।

ते च शिष्या: समागम्य मुर्नि ज्वलिततंजसम् ॥ 10  ॥

ऊच्छुं वचनं सर्वे सर्वेघां ब्रह्माविदानम् ।

श्रुला ते वचनं सर्वे समायान्ति द्विजातय: ॥ 11  ॥

सर्वदैशेषु चागच्छ्न् वर्जयित्या महोदयम् ।

वासिचं चच्छतं सर्वे क्रोधायर्फुलाशमम् ॥ 12  ॥

यथाह वचनं सर्वे श्रणु त्वं मुनिपुंगव ।

क्षत्रियो याजको यस्य चरुजतालस्य विशेषतः ॥ 13  ॥

कथं सदसि भोक्तारो हविस्तस्य सुरर्षयः ।

ब्राह्णा वा महात्मानो भूक्त्वा चारणतलभोजनम् ॥ 14  ॥

कथं स्वर्ग मगिम्ब्यन्ति विश्वामिभेग पातिलाः ।

एतद् वचननैष्छुर्धेमुचूः संरक्लोचना: ॥ 15  ॥

वासिखा मुनिशार्जूल सवै सहमहोदया: ।

तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा सर्वेषां मुनिपुंगवाः ॥ 16  ॥

कोधसंरकतयनः सरोषमिदमब्रवीत् ।

यद् दूषयन्यदूर्दं मां तप उरां समास्थितम् ॥ 17  ॥

भस्मीभूता दुरात्मानो भविष्यन्ति न संशयः ।

अष्ठ ते कालापाशेन नीता वैवस्वतक्षयम् ॥ 18  ॥

In due course exponents of the Vedas began to pour from all lands. Nay, returning to Viswāmitra (who was now living as a hermit) of flaming glory, all his dependents too repeated to him the remarks of all the exponents of the Vedas whom they had approached. The followers said, “Hearing your call all learned Brāhmanas belonging to all lands are duly coming, while some have already arrived, barring, of course, Mahodaya and all the hundred sons of Vasiṣtha. Hear you now, O jewel among



sages, all the observations they made in an angry tone. How would gods, they said, partake of the offerings and how would Rsis eat the remains of those offerings in the sacrificial assembly of a sacrificer whose sacrifice is being conducted by a Kṣatriya, much less of a Caṇḍala? And how, on eating the food offered by a Caṇḍala, would the high-souled Brāhmanas patronized by Viśwāmitra attain to heaven after death? Such harshness of language did all the sons of Vasistha alongwith Mahodaya use with bloodshot eyes, O tiger among sages!" Hearing the aforesaid comment of all those sages, Viśwāmitra (a jewel among ascetics) indignantly spoke as follows with eyes blood-red through anger: "Since they speak ill of me, even though engaged in severe austerities and as such irreproachable, the evil-minded fellows will be reduced to ashes, and conveyed to the abode of Yama (son of the sun-god) this very day by the noose of Kāla, the god of death: there is no doubt about it. (10-18)

सभाजतिशतान्येव मृतपा: सम्भवन्तु ते।

श्वमांसनिवताहारा मृष्टिका नाम निर्थाणा: ॥ 19  ॥

विकृताश्र विल्पाश्र लोकाननुचरन्त्वमान्।

महोदयश्र दुर्बैद्धमामदूर्ध्यं हादूपयत् ॥ 20  ॥

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीचे आदिकायो बालकाण्डे

एकॉनपहित्म: सर्ग: ॥ 49  ॥

Thus ends Canto Fifty-nine in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.



చిత్రమ: सर्ग:

Canto LX

At the instance of Viśwāmitra the sages assembled at his hermitage commence a sacrifice; on the gods failing to appear at the sacrifice to accept the offerings, Viśwāmitra sends Triśanku bodily to heaven by dint of his own spiritual power, but the latter is expelled by Indra, on which Viśwāmitra stops him in the air and proceeds to create a new heaven and desists from his purpose only on the gods granting his desire

तपोबलहान्त् जाला वासिडन्त् समझेदायन्त्।

त्रहमिधये महातेजा विश्वामित्रोस्पथभात् ॥ 1  ॥

Coming to know by his yogic power of Vasisṭha's sons having been ruined along with Mahodaya by dint of his spiritual power, the exceptionally glorious Viśwāmitra spoke as follows in the midst of the Rṣis assembled at his hermitage : (1)

अर्यमिश्रवाकुदायादसिरशड्कुरिति विश्रुतः।

धर्मिष्ठछ्छु वदान्यछ्छु मां चैव शरणं गतः ॥ 2  ॥

स्वेनानेन शरीरिण देवलोकजीषाया।

यथायं स्वशरोगेरि देवलोकं गामियघ्ति ॥ 3  ॥

तथा प्रवर्त्यांं चउो भवाद्ध्रिश मया सह।

विश्वामिवस्वः श्रुता सर्वे एव महर्षेय: ॥ 4  ॥

ऊचु: समेता: सहसा धर्मज्ञा धर्मसंहितम्।

अयं कुशिकदायादो मुनि: परमकोपन: ॥ 5  ॥

"Here is a scion of Ikswāku, widely known by the name of Trisanku, who is not only exceedingly pious but generous also and has moreover sought me as his refuge with the desire of ascending to the realm of gods in his own present form of a Candāla. A sacrifice may kindly be set on foot by you collectively along with me so that this prince may ascend to the region of gods in his own embodied state." Hearing the request of Viśwāmitra, all the great Prāsī (present in that assembly), who knew what is right, conferred and quickly made to one

another the following observation, consistent with righteousness: “This sage, Viśwāmitra (the son of Kuśika), is exceedingly irascible. (2-5)

यदाह वचनं सम्यगेतत् कार्यं न संशय:।

अधिकरणोे हि भगवान् शगयं दास्यतिं रोषत: ॥ 6  ॥

"The proposal that he has put forward must be duly carried out: there is no doubt about it; for the almighty sage, who is bright as fire, will pronounce a curse (upon us) through anger if his desire is not accomplished. (6)

तस्मात् प्रवर्त्यांं यजः सर्शगरीये यथा द्विवि।

गछ्छिद्ध्वाकुदायादो विश्वामित्रस्य तेजसा ॥ 9  ॥

"Therefore, let a sacrifice be set on foot so that Trišanku, a scion of Ikswāku, may bodily ascend to heaven by virtue of Viśwāmitra's spiritual energy. (7)

ततः प्रवर्तीं यजः सर्वे समधितित्ठत।

एवमुक्लवा महर्षय: संजहुतला: क्रियास्तदा ॥ 6  ॥

"Hence let a sacrifice be started and you all take up your respective priestly duties." Saying so, the great Rsis assembled there, then duly took charge of their respective priestly functions. (8)

याजकछ्ध महातेज विश्वामीज्ञभवत् क्रतौ।

श्रलिजश्रानुपूर्यैण मन्ववन्नकोविवादः ॥ 9  ॥

चक्रः सर्वाणि कर्माणि यथाकल्पं यथावधिधि।

ततः कालेन महता विश्वामीजे महतापः ॥ 10  ॥



चकारावाहनं तत्र भागार्थ सर्वदैवता: 1

नाध्यागमंस्तदा तत्र भागार्थ सर्वदैवता: 11 ११ ११

In that sacrifice the highly glorious Viśwāmitra was the chief priest (Adhwaruyu). The other priests too, who were all well-versed in sacred texts, recited at the time of pouring oblations into the sacred fire, did all their allotted duties in their order of sequence according to the procedure as laid down in Kalpa (the branch of knowledge which prescribes rules for ceremonial and sacrificial acts) and with the recitation of relevant Mantras. Then for a long time the great ascetic, Viśwāmitra, invoked the presence in that sacrifice of all the gods (entitled to a share in the offerings made during a sacrifice) to take their allotted shares. But none of the gods appeared on that occasion in the aforesaid sacrifice to take their share.

(9-11)

ततः कोपसमाविष्टो विश्वामिजो महापुनि: ।

सूवमुख्य सकोधश्रियशड्कुभिदमब्रवीत्।। 12  ॥

Overwhelmed with anger, the eminent sage Viśwāmitra thereupon lifted up the sacrificial ladle (with which ghee is poured into the sacred fire) and, full of anger, addressed Trisānku as follows: (12)

पश्य मे तपसो वीर्थे स्वार्षितस्य नरेश्वर।

एष लां सशरीरिण नयामि स्वर्गमीजसा ॥ 13  ॥

“Behold the efficacy of the spiritual energy acquired by me with my own effort, O monarch! I forthwith send you in your embodied state to heaven by virtue of my spiritual energy. (13)

दुष्णपं स्वशरीरण स्वर्ग गच्छ नोरश्वर।

स्वाजितं किंचिद्यप्यिति मया हिं तपसः फलम् ॥ 14  ॥

राजस्वं तेसता तस्य सशरीरो दिवं बज।

उक्तवाक्ये मुनी तस्मिन् सशरीरो नेरश्वः ॥ 15  ॥

दिवं जगाम काकुरल्य मुनिंगं पश्यतां तदा ।

स्वर्गोलोंकं गतं दृष्ट्वा त्रिशड्कुं पाकशासन: ॥ 16  ॥

सह सर्वै. सुरगणैरिंदं वचनमब्रवीत्।

त्रिशड्को गछ्ध भूयस्तं नासि सर्भकृतालय: ॥ 17  ॥

"Ascend to heaven, which cannot be easily attained in one's physical form, O ruler of men! If any reward of my austerities has been earned by me at all, ascend you bodily to heaven by virtue of its glory, O monarch!" No sooner had the aforesaid sage, Viśwāmitra, finished his utterance, the king, Triśanku, bodily rose to heaven, O scion of Kakuttha, while the sages stood looking on. Seeing Triśanku arrived in the heavenly region, Indra (the tamer of the demon Pāka) alongwith all the hosts of gods attending on him, spoke as follows: "Triśanku, return you to earth since no abode has been earned by you in paradise.

(14-17)

गुरुशापहतो मूढ पत भूमिमवाक्शिशरा:।

एवमुक्तो महै-देण विशड्कुप्यतत् पुन: ॥ 18  ॥

विक्रोगशमानस्वाहिति विश्वासिमं तपोधनम्।

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य क्रोगशमानस्य कोशिफकः ॥ 11  ॥

रोपमाहारयत् तीढ़ं तिळ तिछोत चाब्वती।

ऋषिमध्ये स तेजस्वी प्रजापतिविवापर: ॥ 20  ॥

सुजन् दक्षिणमार्थिश्यत् समर्पीनपरान् पुनः ।

नक्षत्रवंशमपरमसुजत् कौधर्मूष्टिन: ॥ 21  ॥

"Doomed (as you are) by your preceptor's curse, O fool, fall headlong to the earth!" Commanded thus by the mighty Indra, Trisanku fell again crying out to Viswāmitra, whose only wealth was his asceticism, as follows: "Save me!" Hearing the aforesaid appeal of the crying Trisanku, Viswāmitra, son of Kuśika, grew wildly angry and said, "Stop! Stop where you are!" Seated in the midst of Rṣis, stupefied with anger, that glorious sage, like another Brahmā (the creator of beings), evolved another group of seven constellations (corresponding to the Great Bear) coursing in the southern quarter, and further created a new galaxy of twenty-seven lunar mansions. (18-21)

दक्षिणां दिश्यमाध्याय ऋषिमध्ये महायशा:।

सुख्टवा नक्षत्रवर्ग च क्रोधिन कतृपीकृत: १२२।



अन्यमिन्हे करिष्यामि लोको चा स्यादनिनरूक:।

दैवतान्यपि स कोधात् स्घुं समुपचक्रमे ॥ 23  ॥

Nay, having created a new galaxy of lunar mansions in the southern quarter while remaining seated in the midst of Rsis assembled in his hermitage, excited with anger, he set about evolving in indignation a hierarchy of gods as well, saying to himself, “I shall create another Indra or else let my heaven remain without an Indra !”

(22-23)

ततः परमसधानता: सर्पिसुँः: सुरासुरा:।

विश्वामित्र महात्यानमुचुः सानुगयं वच: ॥ 24  ॥

Greatly perturbed at that, the gods as well as the demons, including the hosts of Rṣis, addressed to the high-souled Viśwāmitra the following submission full of conciliatory expressions: (24)

अयं राजा महाभाग गुरुभाषपरिश्रतः ।

सशरीर तिवं यानुं नाहैर्वेल तपोधना ॥ 25  ॥

"This monarch, Trisānku, O highly blessed soul, who stands divested of his stock of merits by the curse of his preceptor, does not at all deserve to ascend bodily to heaven, O sage rich in asceticism!" (25)

तेषां तद् वचनं श्रुत्वा देवानां मुनिपुंगवः ।

अब्जवीत् सुमहद् वावयं कौशिकः सर्ववैदताः ॥ 26  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid submission of those gods, Viśwāmitra (son of Kuśika), a veritable jewel among hermits, gave the following noble reply to all the gods: (26)

सशरीस्य भई वसिशज्ञोरस्य भृपतेः।

आरोहणं प्रतिज्ञतं नानृतं कतुमुलसे ॥ 27  ॥

"A pledge has been given by me to this monarch, Trisanku, to help him ascend bodily to heaven. May prosperity attend on you! I dare not go back upon it. (27)

स्वगोउत् सर्गीरिस्य त्रिशक्रांरस्य शाश्वतः ।

नक्षत्राणि च सर्वाणि मामकानि धूवाण्यथा ॥ 28  ॥

"Let perpetual heavenly bliss be the lot of this Trisanku in his physical body and

also let all the lunar mansions created by me be abiding. (28)

याल्लोका धार्थ्यन्ति तिछन्लेतानि सर्वश: ।

यत् कृतानि सुरा: सर्वे तदनुज्ञानुर्धथ ॥ 29  ॥

“Nay, let all these heavenly bodies evolved by me endure as long as these worlds of Brahmā’s creation shall exist. Be pleased you all to grant that.” (29)

एवमुक्ता: सुरा: सर्वे प्रत्यूरुपिंपुंगवम्।

एवं भवतु भरं ते तिछन्त्वतानि सर्वेशः ॥ 30  ॥

Requested thus, all the gods replied as follows to Viśwāmitra, a jewel among sages: “Amen ! May all be well with you !! Let all these endure !!! (30)

गगने तान्यनेकानि वैश्वानरपथाद् बहि:।

नक्षत्राणि मुनिश्रेष्ठ तेषु ज्योति:षु जाज्वलन् ॥ 31  ॥

अवाकृशिरसिद्धगड्कुछ्छ तितल्वमरसंनिभ: ।

अनुयास्यन्ति चैतानि ज्योतोषि नुपसतनम् ॥ 32  ॥

कृतार्थों कॉतिमन्ति च स्वर्गलोकगतं यथा ।

विश्वामिमस्त्र धर्मात्मा सर्वदेवैरभिष्ठुतः ॥ 33  ॥

त्रह्मिभधये महातेजा बाढमित्येव देवता: ।

ततो देवा महात्मानो ऋषयश्रु तपोधाना: ।

जग्मूर्यक्षागतं सर्वे यजस्यान्ते नोत्तम ॥ 34  ॥

"Let those many lunar mansions endure in the heavens beyond the orbit of the stellar sphere (as defined by standard works on astronomy), O jewel among sages ! And let Triśanku, happy as a god, remain suspended with his head downward, shining brightly in the midst of those stars. Nay, these stars will circumambulate Triśanku (the noblest among kings), who will be accomplished of purpose and glorious like a denizen of the heavenly regions." Glorified by all the gods in the midst of the Rśis assembled there, the highly glorious Viśwāmitra too, whose mind is given to piety, merely said to the gods, "All right!" Then, at the end of the sacrifice (which was in the meantime concluded by replacing Triśanku by a representative and after the gods had partaken of the offerings), O jewel

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

among men, all the gods as well as the high-souled Rşis, whose only wealth was

their asceticism, returned even as they had come. (31-34)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पहितम: सर्प: 11 6 o ||

Thus ends Canto Sixty in the Balakanda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

एक्षष्टितम: सर्ग:

Canto LXI

The animal to be sacrificed at the sacrificial performance of King Ambarīṣa having been stolen away by Indra appearing in disguise, the arch-priest enjoined the king to secure a human beast as a substitute. Wandering in search of such a beast, Ambarīṣa saw the sage Rīcika at Bhṛgutaṅga and requested him to hand over his juvenile son in exchange for a hundred thousand cows. On the parents declining to part with their eldest and youngest sons, the middle one, Śunahṣeṣpa by name, voluntarily offered himself for being sold and the king returned with him to his capital

विश्वासिम्रो महातेजा: प्रस्थितान् वीक्ष्य तानृषीन्।

अत्रवीरशादूल सर्वसितान् वनवासिनः ॥ 1  ॥

"Perceiving the aforesaid Rṣis, who dwelt in woods, about to depart, the highly glorious Viśwāmitra, O Rāma (a tiger among men), now spoke to them all in the following words: (1)

महाविश्वः प्रवृत्तो३यं दक्षिणामास्थितो दिशम्।

दिश्रमनां प्रपत्थमस्तत्र तत्प्रयामहे ततः ॥ 2  ॥

"The great impediment in the shape of Trísānku has come over the southern quarter. Hence we shall seek another quarter and practise askesis there. (2)

पश्रिमायां विशालायां पुक्करेषु महात्मन: ।

सुखं तपशुश्चिमाः: सुखं तँब्दि तपोवनम् ॥ 3  ॥

"We shall smoothly practise asceticism in the woods by the side of the Puşkara lakes in the extensive western region, O high-souled ones; for delightful is that forest meant for austerities." (3)

एवमुक्ल्वा महातेजाः पुक्करेषु महामुर्नि:।

तप उर्घ दुराधर्ष तेपे मूलफलाशनः ॥ 4  ॥

Having spoken thus, the great sage, Viśwāmitra, who was highly glorious, began to practise severe asceticism, which was difficult to put down, living on roots and fruits alone. (4)

एतस्मिचेव काले तु अयोध्याधिपतिमहान्।

अम्बरीय इति ख्यातो यटुं समुपगघमे ॥ 5  ॥

At this very time the great king of Ayodhyā, known by the name of Ambarisa, for his part began to perform a horse-sacrifice. (5)

तस्य वै यजमानस्य यशूमिच्जे जहार हं।

प्रणघे तु पशी विशो राजानिमदम्बबित् ॥ 6  ॥

Even while he was carrying on his sacrificial performance, Indra stole away the sacrificial animal: so it is said. The animal having mysteriously disappeared, the arch-priest officiating at the sacrifice, addressed the following words to the king: (6)



प्रशुरभ्याहतो राजन् प्रणष्टस्व दुरंयात्।

असरक्षितारं राजानं प्रतिन दोषा नरेश्वर॥ 7  ॥

"The sacrificial animal brought here, O king, has disappeared through your negligence. Sins accruing from such negligence destroy the king who fails to guard his sacrifice, O ruler of men! (7)

प्रायश्रितं महद्ध्रेतजरं वा पुरुषर्षभ।

आनयस्य पशुं शीघं यावत् कर्म प्रवर्ते ॥ 8  ॥

“(Hunt out and) quickly bring (back), O jewel among men, the lost animal or a human beast as a substitute before the sacrifice actually commences \( ^{1} \) ; for such is the principal atonement \( ^{2} \)  (prescribed by the scriptures) for the sin incurred by you through the loss of the consecrated animal.” (8)

उपाध्यायवचः श्रुला स राजा पुरुषर्षभः।

अन्विवेष महाबूद्धि: पशुं गोर्भिः सहसूश: ॥ 9  ॥

देशाझ्ञपदांस्तांस्तान् नगरागि वनानि च।

आश्रमागि च पुण्यानि मार्गमाणो महीपति: ॥ 10  ॥

स पुत्रसहितं तात सभार्थं रघुनन्दन।

भ्युपुङ़े समासीनमूचीकं संददर्शं हे ॥ 11  ॥

Hearing the injunction of the family priest, and taking with him thousands of cows for being given in exchange on demand, that highly intelligent king, a veritable jewel among men, searched for a human beast to be sacrificed in place of the sacrificial horse. Carrying on his search for the stolen horse as well as for a human substitute through different principalities and their subdivisions, cities, woodlands and holy hermitages, the aforesaid king, O dear Rāma (a scion of Raghu), saw at close quarters, on Mount Bhrgutunga (a mountain-peak associated with Sage Bhrgu, one of the nine mind-born

sons of Brahma), the sage Rcika sitting at ease with his sons and wife: so the tradition goes. (9-11)

त्युवाच महातेजाः प्रणमाधिपसादा च।

महर्षि तपसा दोरां राजर्षिरितप्रभः ॥ 12  ॥

पृष्ट्वा सर्वत्र कुशलमृषीकं तमिदं वचः ।

पालां शतसह्वेण विक्रांणीये सुतं यदि ॥ 13  ॥

प्रशोरर्थे महाभाग कृतकृत्योज्सि भार्णव।

सर्वे परिता देशा यज्चि न लभे पशुम् ॥ 14  ॥

Bowing low to him and thereby securing his goodwill and also inquiring after his all-round welfare, the highly glorious Ambariṣa, a royal sage, who was possessed of infinite splendour, addressed the following submission to that sage Kcika, aglow with spiritual energy acquired through askesis: "If for a lakh of cows you agree to sell one of your sons in my favour for being used as a sacrificial animal, O highly blessed one, I shall feel accomplished of purpose, O scion of Bhrgu ! All territories have been ransacked by me, but I have not yet recovered the sacrificial horse. (12-14)

दातुमहींस मूल्येन सुतमेकमितो मम।

एवमुक्तो महातेजा ऋशीकस्लखबीद् वचः ॥ 15  ॥

"Be pleased, therefore, to deliver one of these sons to me for consideration." Requested thus by the king, the highly glorious sage Ricika for his part spoke as follows: (15)

नाहं ज्येलं नरश्रेष्ठ विक्रीणीयां कक्षंचन।

ऋरीकस्य वचः शुला तेषां माता महात्मनाम् ॥ 16  ॥

उवाच नरशादूलमवरीषिभदं वचः।

अविक्रेयं सुतं ज्येलं भगवानाह भागवः ॥ 17  ॥

"I am not prepared to sell my eldest

1. The period intervening the release and the return of the sacrificial horse from its wanderings is considered to be a sort of respite when the sacrificial proceedings are held in abeyance.

2. The compound word “Prāyaścitta” is composed of two parts ‘Prāyas’ and ‘Citta’, whose meaning is tersely given in the following Sanskrit half-verse :

प्रायः पार्य विकानीयाधितनं तक्छोधनं सुन्तम्।

"One should understand the word ‘Prāyas’ to mean ‘sin’, while ‘Citta’ has been recognized as conveying the sense of its ‘atonement’.”

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

boy on any account, O jewel among men!" Hearing the answer of Ricía (her husband), the mother of those high-minded boys addressed the following words to Ambarisa, a tiger among men: "The venerable Ricía (a scion of Sage Bhrgu) declares our eldest son as too precious to be sold. (16-17)

ममापि दरितं विद्धि कनिष्ठं शुनकं प्रभो।

तस्मात् कनीयसं पुत्रं न दास्ये तव पार्थित्ये ॥ 18  ॥

"Know Śunaka too, the youngest, to be my favourite, O lord! Therefore, I shall not hand over my youngest son to you, O ruler of the earth! (18)

प्रायेण हि नरश्रेष्ठ ज्येष्ठा: पितृपु वल्लभाः। मातृणां च कनीयांसत्समाद् रक्ष्ये कनीयसम् ॥ 19  ॥

"For, as a general rule, O jewel among men, eldest sons are the pets of their fathers; while the youngest are the darlings of their mothers. Hence I shall retain the youngest." (19)

उक्ताबक्ये मुनी तस्मिन् मुपिनप्त्यां तथैव च।

शून:शेपः स्वयं राम भध्य्यो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।। 20  ॥

The sage having replied as above and his wife too having spoken even as she had done, O Rāma, Śunaḥśepa, the middle one, uttered the following words of his own accord: (20)

पिता जेष्टमविकेवं माता चाह कनीयसम्।

विकेवं मध्यमं मव्ये राजपुत्र नयस्व माम्।। 21  ॥

"Father pronounces the eldest to be unsaleable and mother speaks of the youngest as such. I thereby conclude the middle one, i.e., myself, to be worthy of being disposed of. Take me away, therefore, O king (a king's son yourself)!" (21)

अथ राजा महाबाहो वाक्याने ब्रह्मादिन:।

हिरण्यस्य सुवर्णस्य कोदिभी रजराशिभ: ॥ 22  ॥

गवां शरासह्वेण शुण:शेपे नेरेश्वर: ।

गृहीत्वा परमप्रीती जगाम रघुनन्दन ॥ 23  ॥

Taking Sūnahśepa at once with him in exchange for tens of millions of silver and gold coins, heaps of precious stones and a lakh of cows at the end of the aforesaid utterance of the Brāhmaṇa boy, who was an expositor of the Vedas, O mighty-armed Rāma (a scion of Raghu), King Ambarisa, a ruler of men, departed, highly pleased.

(22-23)

अम्बरीषस्तु राजर्षी रथमारोय्य सत्वर:।

शुनःशेपं महातेजा जगामाशु महायशा: ॥ 24  ॥

Quickly placing Śunahśepa in his chariot, the exceedingly glorious and highly illustrious Ambarīṣa, a royal sage, hurriedly left for his capital. (24)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीचे आदिकाव्ये बालकार्डे

एकषहितम: सर्ग: ॥ 61  ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-one in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.



दिष्टितम: सर्ग:

Canto LXII

On reaching Puškara, while Ambarīṣa is taking rest, Śunahṣepa approaches Viśwāmitra, who was practising austerities there, and inquires of him a means of escaping death without meeting with the king's opposition, whereupon Viśwāmitra teaches him a prayer each for propitiating Indra and Lord Viṣṇu, respectively, by reciting which the boy secures release from Ambarīṣa's bondage and the latter gets the reward of the sacrifice without sacrificing him

शून:शेपं नरश्रेष्ठ गृहीता तु महाश्रणा:।

व्यप्रमत् पुक्कर राजा मध्याह्रे रघुनन्दन ॥ 1  ॥

Taking Śunahśepa with him, O jewel among men, the highly illustrious king Ambarṣa for his part rested at Puṣkara at noon, O scion of Raghu! (1)

तस्य विश्रममाणस्य शून:शेपो महायशा:।

पुब्करं च्येष्ठमायाम विश्वामित्रं ददर्शे ह३। 2  ॥

तप्यन्तभूषिभि: सार्थ मातूलं परमातून:।

विषणणवदनो दीनस्तृष्णया च भ्रमेण चा ॥ 3  ॥

पपाताङ़े मुने राम वाक्यं चेदमुचावा ह।

न मेप्रित माता न पिता जातयो बाङ्याव: कुतः ॥ 4  ॥

Making his way to the elder (main) Puṣkara (there being two other lakes in the vicinity of the main lake, known as the middle and the younger Puṣkara respectively), while the latter was taking rest, the highly renowned Śunahśepa, so the tradition goes, saw his maternal uncle*, Viśwāmitra, practising austerities with other sages. Nay, pulling a long face and looking miserable from thirst (or desire to live) and fatigue, the boy, who was sore afflicted, sank into the sage's lap, O Rāma, and spoke as follows, so it is said: "There is no mother nor father to me; how then could there be any kinsmen or relations?

(2-4)

ग्रातुमहींस मां सौम्य धर्मेण मुनिपुंगव।

ग्राता त्वं हि नराश्रेष्ठ सर्वेघां त्वं हि भावन: ॥ 5  ॥

"Be pleased to deliver me, O gentle Sir, in the name of piety, O jewel among sages; for you are the redeemer of all as well as their benefactor. (5)

राजा च कृतकामयै: स्यादहं दीधार्युस्यय:।

स्वर्गलोकमुपाशनीयां तपस्तवा ह्रानुतमम् ॥ 6  ॥

"Pray, so arrange that the king Ambarisa may realize his object in the shape of a reward of his projected sacrifice, while I may be saved from death and, attaining a long life and practising austerities, ascend to the celestial plane, the highest of all the three worlds. (6)

स मे नाशो ह्रानाश्य भव भवेन चेतताः।

पितेव पुरं धर्मांस्यातुमहींस किल्बवात् ॥ 7  ॥

"With a cheerful mind indeed be you, celebrated as you are, a protector to me, a forlorn child. You ought to protect me, O pious soul, against adversity born of sin, even as a father protects his son." (7)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुला विश्वामिः महातपा: ।।

सान्त्वयित्वा बहुविधं पूषानिदमुवाच ह ८।   ॥

Hearing the aforesaid prayer of Śunahśepa and consoling him in many ways,

* It has already been mentioned in verse 7 of Canto XXXIV that Viśwāmitra had a sister, Satyavatī by name, who was given in marriage to Rcīka. It was of this Satyavatī that Śunahśepa was presumably born.

*VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

the great ascetic, Viśwāmitra, spoke to his own sons as follows, so it is said: (8)

यकृते पितर: पुराङ्ञनयित्त शुभार्थिनः ।

परलोकहिताधाय तस्य कालोउवमागत: ॥ 9  ॥

"The time has just come for ensuring our good in the other world, for which fathers desirous of blessings beget sons.

(9)

अयं मृनिसुतो बालो मतः शरणामिच्छति ।

अस्य जीवितमायेग प्रियं कुकृत पुत्रका: ॥ 10  ॥

"This son of a hermit, who is yet a child, seeks deliverance through me. Do him a good turn, my dear sons, by merely parting with your own life. (10)

सर्वे सुकृतकमाण: सर्वे धर्मपरायणा:।

पशुभूता नेरन्स रुनिमयेः प्रयन्त्रा ॥ 11  ॥

"You are all engaged in virtuous acts and are all devoted to duty. Taking the place of a victim at the sacrificial performance of the king Ambariṣa, afford satisfaction to the god of fire. (11)

नाथवांश्र शुना:शेपो यज्ञशवित्ते भवेत्।

देवातसत्यपित्रा स्युमेम चापि कृतं वच: ॥ 12  ॥

"In this way not only will Śunahśepa find a protector in us and secure deliverance from death but the sacrifice of Ambarīṣa will also be completed without any let or hindrance. Nay, the gods will have been propitiated and my pledge of security given to him redeemed." (12)

मुनेस्तद् वचनं श्रुला मधुच्छन्दादय: सुता:।

साधिभानं नरश्रेष्ठ सल्लीमिदमबुवन् ॥ 13  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid exhortation of Viśwāmitra, O jewel among men, his sons, of whom Madhucchanda was the eldest, proudly and lightly replied as follows: (13)

कथामात्मसुतान् दिला जायसे5-स्मुतं विधो।

अकायंमिव पश्याम: शवमांसिव भोजेन ॥ 14  ॥

"How is it that you proceed to save another's son, parting with your own sons, O almighty sage? We reckon this attempt

of yours to be almost as sacrilegious as mixing the flesh of a dog in one's dish." (14)

तेपां तद् चवनं श्रुला पुत्राणां मुनिपुंगलः ।

कोधसंरक्तनयनो व्याहतैमुपचक्रमे ॥ 15  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid comment of his above-named sons, Viśwāmitra (a jewel among sages) proceeded to curse them (as follows), his eyes bloodshot through anger: (15)

निः साध्वसिमं प्रोक्ते धर्मादिप विगहितम्।

अतिकल्प न्तु मद्वाकयं दारुणं रोमहर्षणम् ॥ 16  ॥

"This reply, given by you disregarding my exhortation, is intrepid, nay, divorced from piety, sharp and shocking too. (16)

श्वर्यमंभोजिनः सर्वे वासिष्ठा इव जातिषु।

पूर्णं वर्षेसहरं तु पृथिव्यामनुवल्यथा ॥ 17  ॥

"Like the sons of Vasisṭha, therefore, you shall be born on earth among the low-born classes such as the Caṇḍalas and Muṣṭikas and, living on the flesh of dogs, drag your wretched existence for full thousand years." (17)

कृत्वा शापसमायुक्तान् पुत्रान् मुनीवरस्तदा।

शुर्नःशेपमुवाचातं कृत्वा रक्षां निरामयाम्।। 18  ॥

Having subjected his sons to a curse as aforesaid, Viśwāmitra, the foremost of hermits, then spoke to the wretched Śunahśepa as follows, ensuring protection free from disease to him by means of mystic spells :

पवित्रवापशैराबब्द्रो रत्कामाल्यानुपेयनः ।

वैष्णवं व्यपमासाघ वारिभरगिमुदाहर।   ॥ ९ ॥

इमे च गाधे हुे दिव्ये गायेधा मुपिनपुरक।

अम्बरीपस्य यज्ञस्मित्त: सिविद्रमवाप्यसि ॥ 20  ॥

"Scrambling to the sacrificial post sacred to Lord Viṣṇu, when you have been bound with cords of Darbha grass and adorned with a wreath of crimson flowers and bedaubed with red sandal-paste for being offered as a victim at the sacrificial



performance of King Ambarişa, glorify through the sacred fire Indra and Lord Viṣṇu by means of glories addressed to them and then you would do well to chant the two excellent psalms invoking the two aforementioned deities, which I am presently going to teach you, O dear son of Sage Ricka! Thereby you will attain your object in the shape of deliverance from death at the projected sacrificial performance of King Ambarişa." (19-20)

शून:शेपो गृहीत्वा ते हे गाधे सुसमाहितः।

त्वरया राजसिंहं तमव्यरिभयुवाच इति २१ १ ॥

Learning the aforementioned couple of psalms, as taught by Viśwāmitra, with a fully concentrated mind, Śunahṣepa hastily spoke to the said King Ambarīṣa, a lion among kings, as follows: (21)

राजसिंह महावृद्धे शीर्घं गच्छावहे वयम्।

निवर्तेयस्य राजेन्द्र दीक्षां च समुदाहर ॥ 22  ॥

“O highly intelligent monarch, O lion among kings, let us both quickly proceed to our destination. Go through the ceremony of consecration for the sacrifice, O king of kings, and conclude the sacrifice without any hitch or rub.” (22)

तद् वाक्यमृषिपुरस्य श्रुला हर्षसमित्वतः।

जगाम रुपति: शीर्षे चज्जादमतन्त्रिः ॥ 23  ॥

Filled with joy to hear the aforesaid request of the sage's son, Śunahśepa, the king Ambarīṣa quickly reached the sacrificial enclosure, shaking off all lethargy. (23)

सदस्यानुमते राजा पवित्रकृतलक्षणम्।

पशुं रक्ताम्बरं कृत्वा यूपे तं समबन्धयत् ॥ 24  ॥

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोये आदिकान्ये बालकार्ये द्विषहितम: सर्पि ॥ 62  ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-two in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

* According to Govindarāja, an esteemed commentator of the Rāmāyaṇa, Ambarīsa is no other than King Hariścandra, of whom a similar story is told in the Bahvrca-Brāhmana.



त्रिष्टितम: सर्ग:

Canto LXIII

Brahmā pays a visit to Viśwāmitra at Puškara and rewards him with the status of a Ṣsi (seer). There he feels enamoured of Menakā, a celestial nymph deputed by Indra, and enjoys life with her for ten years. At last he realizes his folly and retires to the Himalāyas, where he renews his austerities and is rewarded with the status of a Maharṣi by Brahmā. Still dissatisfied, he prosecutes his austerities with renewed vigour

पूर्णे वर्षेसहसे तु ब्रतस्नातं महापुरिभू।

अभ्यागछ्न् सुरा: सर्वे तपः फलचिकारीवं: ॥ 1  ॥

At the end of full one thousand years all the gods headed by Brahmā, the creator, for their part, keen as they were to bestow on the sage the fruit of his austerities, personally called on Viśwāmitra, the eminent sage, who had just finished his ablutions marking the conclusion of a sacred vow. (1)

अत्रवीत् सुमहतेजा ब्रह्मा सुरुचिरं वच: ।

त्रशिप्तवमासि भई ते स्वार्जिते: कर्मिभः शुभे: ॥ 2  ॥

The exceptionally glorious Brahma addressed to him the following most pleasing words: “May good betide you! You have now become a Rsi, pure and simple, while you were till now only a royal sage by virtue of pious acts in the shape of austerities performed by your own self.” (2)

तमेवमुक्त्वा देवेशप्रिदवं पुनरभ्यगात्।

विश्वासिमो ग्रहतेजा भूयस्तेपे महत् तपः ॥ 3  ॥

Speaking to him thus, Brahmā, the suzerain lord of the gods, returned to the highest heaven, his own realm; while Viśwāmitra, the great ascetic, embarked once more on a course of severe austerities.

(3)

ततः कालेन महता मेनका परमायसरः ।

पृक्पोरुष् नरश्रेष्ठ स्तानुं समुपकमे ॥ 4  ॥

Then after a long time (one day)

Menakā, a celestial nymph of the highest order, came to bathe in the three lakes going by the name of Puškara, O jewel among men!

तां ददर्श महात्तेग मेनकां कुशिकात्मकान:।

रूपेणाग्रतिमां तत्र विद्युतं जलदे यथा १५ १।

The highly glorious Viśwāmitra (son of Kuśika) beheld in the water of one of the aforesaid lakes the celebrated Menakā, matchless in beauty, shining like a streak of lightning in a cloud. (5)

कन्दपैदर्पवैशगो मुनित्सातिमदमब्रवीत्।

अप्सर: स्वागतं तेउस्तु वस चेह ममाङ्रमे॥ 6  ॥

Succumbing to the passion of love, the sage (Viśwāmitra) spoke to her in the following words: “My welcome to you, O celestial nymph ! Nay, dwell in this hermitage of mine. (6)

अनुग्रहीष्ण धर्ते ते मदनेने विमोहितम्।

इत्युक्ता सा वरारोहा तत्र वास्मयाकरोत् ॥ 9  ॥

"May prosperity attend on you! Be gracious to me, infatuated as I am through love." Requested thus, the aforesaid belle forthwith took up her abode in that hermitage. (7)

तपसे हिं महाविश्वो विश्वामित्रमुपायामत्।

तस्यां वसन्त्यां वर्षिण पञ्र पञ्र च चरायच ॥ 6  ॥

विश्वामित्राओं सेयोये सुखेन व्यतिककम्प: ।

अथ काले गते तत्सिम्न विश्वामित्रो महामुपिनः ॥ 9  ॥



सबीड इव संवृत्तिश्रन्तागोकपरायण: 1

बुक्धिपुर्ने: समुत्पत्रा सामर्षा रघुनन्दन 11 १० १

सर्व सुराणों कर्मैतत् तपोउपहरणं महत्।

अहोरायापदेशेन गताः संवससा द्वश 11 ११ १ १

काममोहाधिभूतस्य विल्पोउपं प्रत्युपस्थितः।

स नि:श्रवसन् मुर्गिनस: पश्रातापेन दु:खिता: 11 १२ १ १

Indeed, in the form of this nymph a great obstacle in the way of his austerities presented itself before Viśwāmitra. Ten years were spent happily by her while living in that pleasant hermitage of Viśwāmitra, O Rāma ! So much time having rolled by unperceived, the great sage Viśwāmitra felt ashamed as it were and fell a prey to anxiety and grief. The revelation dawned on him, with a feeling of indignation, O cson of Raghu, that all that, which was a deep-laid design to rob him of the spiritual energy stored by him through askesis, was the work of the gods. He said to himself, “Ten long years have rolled by me as though it were a day and night, overwhelmed as I was by infatuation born of concupiscence. This is nothing but an obstacle come in my way!” Sighing deeply with this thought the said Viśwāmitra, the foremost of sages, felt distressed through remorse. (8-12)

भौतामप्रसरं दृष्ट्वा वेपनीं प्राझलिं स्थिताम्।

मेनकां मधुरैवाक्यैविस्युन कृशिकात्मज: ॥ 13  ॥

उत्तरं पर्वतं राम विश्वामित्रो जगाम हा।

स कृत्वा नैष्टिकों बुद्धिं जेनुतकामो महायशा: ॥ 14  ॥

कोशिकांतीरामासाठ तपसोपे दुरासदम्।

तस्य वर्षसहस्याणि घोरं तप उपासतः ॥ 15  ॥

उत्तरे पर्वते राम देवतानामभूद् भयम्।

आमन्वयन् समानाय सर्वे सर्विणगा: सुरा: ॥ 16  ॥

Seeing the celestial nymph, Menaka, standing before him with folded hands, trembling with fear, and dismissing her with sweet expressions, O Rāma, Viśwāmitra,

son of Kuśika, proceeded to the northern mountain, the Himalayas: so the tradition goes. Making a firm resolve to observe lifelong celibacy with intent to conquer passion, and reaching the bank of the Kauśiki*, Viśwāmitra, the highly illustrious sage, practised austerities which were hard to accomplish (for others). Fear entered the mind of gods when they saw Viśwāmitra practising terrible austerities on the northern mountain for thousands of years past. Approaching Brahmā, all the gods accompanied by hosts of Rṣis, prayed to him as follows: (13-16)

महर्षिशर्ध लभतां साधयं कुशिकात्मवज: ।

देवतानां वचः श्रुत्वा सर्वलोकपितामहः ॥ 17  ॥

अज्ञवीन्मधुरं वाक्यं विश्वामित्रं पतोधनम् ।

महर्षे स्वागतं वत्स तपसोप्रेण तोषितः ॥ 18  ॥

महत्वमृषिमुख्यतं ददामि तव कौशिकः ।

ब्रह्णगस्तु वचः श्रुत्वा विश्वामित्रसपोधनः ॥ 19  ॥

प्राझ्जलि: प्रणतो भृत्वा प्रत्युवाच पितामहम् ।

ब्रह्णशिक्बदमतुलं स्वार्जितैः कर्मर्पिः: शुभेः ॥ 20  ॥

यदि मे भगवबाह्रत ततोड़ं विकित्तिन्रयः ।

तमुवाच ततो ब्रह्मा न तावत् त्वं जितेन्रियः ॥ 21  ॥

"May yonder Viśwāmitra (son of Kuśika) deservedly receive the title of Maharṣi, an eminent seer." Hearing the intercession of the gods, Brahmā, the progenitor of the entire creation, addressed the following sweet words to Viśwāmitra, whose only wealth was his asceticism: "Hail, O eminent seer! Pleased with your severe austerities, O dear child, I hereby confer on you the distinction in the shape of the foremost rank among Rṣis, O son of Kuśika!" Hearing the boon of Brahmā, Viśwāmitra, however, whose only wealth was his asceticism, replied to Brahmā (the progenitor of the entire creation) with folded-hands as follows, bending low with humility: "If your Holiness

* A reference is invited once more in this connection to verses 7-8 of Canto xxxiv, in which it has already been shown how the elder sister of Viśwāmitra, having followed her deceased husband to heaven, further turned into a river and still flows under the name of Kaušiki (the modern Koši) in Bihar.

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

used for me the epithet ‘Brahmarsi’ (a Brāhmaṇa seer), which has no equal in my eyes, as earned through pious acts performed by myself, then only I should consider myself as having thoroughly conquered my senses.” Thereupon Brahmā replied to him, “You have not been able to conquer your senses. (17-21)

यतव्य मुनिशादूल इत्युकत्वा विविवं गतः।

विप्रस्थितयुं देवेषु विश्वामित्रो महामुनि: ॥ 22  ॥

ऊर्धवाब्निरालम्बो वायुभक्षस्तपश्रन्।

घर्मे पछ्जतया भूतला वर्षास्वाकाशसंक्षय: ॥ 23  ॥

शिशिरे सलिलेशायी राख्यानि तपोधन: ।

एवं वर्षसहसं हि तपो घोरमुपागमत् ॥ 24  ॥

"Strive further, O tiger among sages!" Saying so, he rose to the highest heaven (Brahmaloka). On the gods having dispersed, the eminent sage, Viśwāmitra, resumed his austerities standing with his arms lifted upwards, living on air alone and remaining without any abode. Nay, the ascetic whose

only wealth was his asceticism, remained seated in the midst of four fires, one in each quarter, and the sun as the fifth overhead in summer, in open air during the rains and standing in water for days and nights during the winter. In this way indeed he practised terrible austerities for a thousand years. (22-24)

तस्मिन् संलव्यमाने तु विश्वामिभे महामुनी ।

संताप: सुमहानासीत् सुराणां वासवस्य च। 25 ।।

While the great sage Viswāmitra was duly practising austerities as aforesaid, deep anguish indeed seized the mind of the gods as well as of Indra. (25)

नम्भायमसरं शक्र: सर्वै: सह महकृदणै:।

उवाचात्महितं वाक्यमहितं कौशिकस्य च ॥ 26  ॥

Indra alongwith all the hosts of gods called and addressed the celestial nymph Rambhā the following request, which was in his (Indra's) own interest, and prejudicial to Viśwāmitra (the son of Kuśika): (26)

इत्यापै श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंने आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे विश्रितम: सर्प: ॥ 63  ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-three in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

चतु:षित्रम: सर्ग:

Canto LXIV

Petrifying by means of a curse Rambhā, the celestial nymph sent by Indra to wean him from his austerities, Viśwāmitra resolves upon a further course of austerities

सुरकायंमिदं राभे कर्तवं सुमहत् त्वया।

लोपनं कोशिकस्ये काममोहसपीवन्तु।। 1  ॥

"This very great errand of the gods in the shape of beguiling Viśwāmitra conjointly with infatuating him by rousing his passion has to be done by you at this juncture." (1)

तथोका सापसरा राम सहसाक्षेण धीमता।

श्रीडिता प्राझ्लिलवांक्य प्रत्युवाच सुरेश्वरम् ॥ 2  ॥

Feeling abashed when told thus by the sagacious Indra (the thousand-eyed god), O Rāma, the aforesaid celestial nymph gave the following reply with folded-hands to the ruler of gods : (2)

अयं सुरपते घोर विश्वामिजो महामुनि: ।

क्रोधमूलस्थयते घोर मायि देव न संशयः ॥ 3  ॥

"This hot-tempered and eminent sage, Viśwāmitra, will pronounce a terrible curse

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

on me, my lord: there is no doubt about it, O ruler of gods! (3)

ततो हि मे भयं देव प्रसादं कतुमहसि।

एवमुक्तस्या राम सभयं भीतया तदा ॥ 4  ॥

तामुवाच सहस्वाक्षो वेयपानां कृताझलिम्।

मा भैषी रम्भे भई ते कुरुच मम शासनम् ॥ 5  ॥

“Since great fear on this score lurks in my mind, be pleased to take pity on me, and excuse me, my lord!” Requested thus with a mind full of fear by the frightened nymph on that occasion, O Rāma, Indra (the thousand-eyed god) spoke as follows to her, who stood trembling before him with folded hands: “Do not be afraid, Rambhā; may all be well with you! Please do my bidding. (4-5)

कोकिले हदयगही माधवे रचितरुभे।

अहं कन्दपरिसहितः: स्थायामि तव पारबर्ते: ॥ 6  ॥

"Accompanied by the god of love, I too shall remain by your side in the form of a cuckoo, that captivates the heart by its enthralling notes in the vernal season when the trees assume a delightful appearance with their green foliage and fragrant blossoms. (6)

लं हिं हल प्रयं बहुर्णं कृत्वा परमभास्वरम्।

तमृषिं कोशिकं भरे भेदस्य तप्तिस्वम् ॥ 9  ॥

"Wearing an exceedingly smart appearance full of manifold charms, do divert the mind of the celebrated sage Viśvāmitra (son of Kuśika), who is given to austerities, O good lady!" (7)

सा श्रुत्वा वचनं तस्य कृत्वा रूपमनुत्तमम्।

लोभयामास ललिता विश्वामित्रं शुचिर्यमिता ॥ 8  ॥

Hearing his command and assuming looks which could not be excelled by another, the belle, who wore a bright smile on her lips proceeded to lure Viśwāmitra. (8)

कोकिलस्य तु शुश्राव वल्य व्याहरतः स्वनम्।

सम्यहूंने मनस स चैनामववैक्षत। 1 1 1 ।

Viśwāmitra heard the notes of the

warbling cuckoo and with an overjoyed mind looked at Rambhā too. (9)

अथ तस्य च शब्देन गौतेनाप्रतिमेने च।

दर्शनेन च रभाया मुनिन: संदेहमागतः ॥ 10  ॥

Attracted by the notes of the cuckoo as well as by the unique song and sight of Rambhā, the sage now fell a-doubting (whether the nymph had come of her own accord or had been sent by Indra to interfere with his austerities). (10)

सह्वाक्षस्य तत्सर्वे विज्ञाय मुपिंगुवः।

रभां क्रोधसमाविष्टः शशाप कुशिकात्मजः ॥ 11  ॥

Concluding the whole mischief to be the doing of Indra (the thousand-eyed god), Viśwāmitra (son of Kuśika), the foremost of ascetics, was filled with rage and cursed Rambhā as follows: (11)

यमां लोभयसे रम्भे कामकोधजर्विषणम्।

दशवर्षेसह्वाणि शैली स्थास्यसि दुर्भगे ॥ 12  ॥

ब्राह्मण: सुमहातेजास्तपोबलसमप्तितः ।

उद्धरिष्यित तम्भे त्वां मत्कोधकलुपीकृताम् ॥ 13  ॥

"Since you have tried to seduce me, who seeks to conquer lust and anger, O Rambhā, you shall continue to stand as a stone image for ten thousand years, O hapless woman! An exceptionally glorious Brahmana (viz., Vasistha, a mind-born son of Brahmā) richly endowed with spiritual energy acquired through austerities, O Rambhā, will redeem you, who have been punished for your foul deed through my anger." (12-13)

एवमुक्ल्वा महातेजा विश्वामिजो महापुनि: ।

अशकनुवन् धारयितुं कोपं संतापमात्मन: ॥ 14  ॥

Having spoken thus, unable as he was to control his anger, the highly glorious and eminent sage, Viśwāmitra, fell a prey to remorse on his having exhausted the stock of merits, earned through his austerities, by cursing the nymph. (14)

तस्य शपेन महता रभभ शैली तद्धभवत्।

वचः शुला च कन्दपीं महर्षे: स च निरर्गत: ॥ 15  ॥



Under his terrible curse Rambha instantly got petrified. And, hearing the curse of the great Rşi Viśwāmitra, Love as well as Indra slipped away. (15)

कोपेन च महातेजास्तपोउपहरणे कृते ।

इन्द्रियैप्ति राम न लेभे शान्तिमास्तन: ॥ 16  ॥

The stock of his merit earned through austerities having been mitigated through his anger, O Rāma, Viśwāmitra too, though highly glorious, did not get peace of mind because of his unconquered senses. (16)

बभूवाय्य मनाश्रुता तपोप्रहणे कृते।

नैवं कोधं गमिष्यामि न च बव्ये कर्थचना ॥ 17  ॥

The spiritual energy stored through his austerities having been weakened, the thought entered his mind: “I shall no more give way to anger thus, nor speak on any account. (17)

अथवा नोच्छविस्यामि संवत्सरातान्यपि।

अहं हि शोषयिष्यामि आत्मानं विजितेन्द्रिया: ॥ 18  ॥

“Nor shall I even breathe for hundreds of years. Indeed, having fully controlled my senses, I shall chasten my temper. (18)

तावद् यावद्धि मे प्रापं ब्राह्मणं तपसाजितम्।

अनुच्छूवसस्थुब्जानसितलघैं शापश्वती: समा: ॥ 19  ॥

"Till Brahmanhood is attained by me as earned through austerities, I shall do without breathing or eating for innumerable years. (19)

नहि मे तथ्यानस्य क्षयं यास्यन्ति मृत्यः।

एवं वर्षसहस्यच दीक्षां स मुणिनुग्वलः ।

चकाराप्रातिमां लोके प्रतिज्ञां रघुनन्दन ॥ 20  ॥

"Nor will my limbs get atrophied so long as I continue to practise austerities." In this way the celebrated Viśwāmitra, the foremost of sages, O Rāma, scion of Raghu, took a pledge which had no parallel in this world, to embark on a sacred vow of refraining from breathing and eating for a thousand years. (20)

इत्यार्थ श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतु:ष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ 64  ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-four in the Bálakaṇḍa of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

पञ्रष्टितम: सर्ग:

Canto LXV

On Viśwāmitra not ceasing from his austerities even on his being conferred the title of a Brahmarsī by Brahmā, Vasisṭha, as urged by gods, recognizes it and here ends the narration of Satāñanda. Having worshipped Viśwāmitra, King Janaka then returns to his palace

अथ हैमवर्ती राम दिशं स्वक्ता महामुपिनः।

पूर्वा दिशमनुपाय तपसेटे सुदारुणम् ॥ 1  ॥

"Leaving the northern quarter in which stand the Himalayas, Viśwāmitra (the eminent sage) now sought the eastern quarter and began to practise most severe austerities again. (1)

मौनं वर्षेसूक्षस्य कृत्वा ब्रतमनुत्तमम्।

चकाराप्रतिमं राम तप: परमदृष्कम्॥ 2  ॥

"Undertaking the supreme vow of rigid silence extending over a period of one thousand years, O Rāma, he embarked on a course of austerities which was most difficult to prosecute and had no parallel. (2)

पूर्णे वर्षेसूक्षे तु काष्ठभूतं महापुनिम्।

विश्नेबेबुधिपरायूतं क्रोधो नान्तरमाविश्यत्। 3 3 ।

स कुला निश्रयं राम तप आतिधतात्ययम्।

तस्य वर्धेसूक्षस्य ब्रते पूर्णे महब्रात: ४ ४।

* BÁŁAKÁNDA *

بها کُو مَارَخَواِنزِكْ تَرِيمُنزِكْ مَارِكْ تَرِيمُنزِكْ تَرِيمُنزِكْ تَرِيمُنزِكْ تَرِيمُنزِكْ تَكْتِكْ تَكْتِكْ تَكْتِكْ تَكْتِكْ تَكْتِكْ تَكْتُكْ تَكْتُكْ تَكْتُكْ تَكْتُكْ تَكْتُكْ تَكْتُكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتُكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ تَكْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت کْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت кْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت كْتَكْ ت κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·κ·

भोक्तुमारब्धवानत्र तस्मिन्काले रूपूतम।

इन्हो द्विजातिभूत्वा तं सिद्धमरमयचात।।।।।

"Even at the end of full one thousand years anger did not overpower the great sage, who remained stiff as wood (not even making any signs or gestures), even though he was in the meantime buffeted by many obstacles; for he had embarked on this course of austerities after making an unalterable resolution, O Rama! On his vow of prosecuting the austerities for a thousand years being completed, Viśwāmitra, who had taken that great vow, proceeded to take his food. Appearing at the nick of time in the guise of a Brāhmaṇa, O scion of Raghu, Indra begged of him the cooked food that had been served before him. (3-5)

तम्पे दत्ता तदा सिद्ध सर्वे विषाय निश्रितः।

नि:श्रेषितेउं भगवानभूक्लैव महतापा: ॥ 6  ॥

न किंचिद्वददूद् विधं मौनत्रतमुपार्थितः ।

तथैवासीत् पुनर्भौमनुच्छ्वासं चकार हं ॥ 7  ॥

"Having unhesitatingly given all the cooked food to the Brāhmana, and remaining without food, the whole stock having been exhausted, the great ascetic, possessed as he was of extraordinary power, did not speak a word to the Brāhmana, firm as he was in his vow of silence. He became silent once more even as before and also suspended his breath: so the tradition goes. (6-7)

अथ वर्षेसहनं च नोच्छूवसन् मुनिपुंगवः ।

तस्यानुच्छूवसमानस्य मृत्रिं ध्यमो व्याजयत ॥ 8  ॥

त्रैलोकयं येन सम्प्रान्तमातिपतिमिवाथवत्।

ततो देवर्षिगाथवां: पत्रोगेरागश्रसा: ॥ 9  ॥

मोहित्तासपसा तस्य तेजसा मन्दरप्रयः ।

कश्मलेपहताः: सर्वे पितामहमथावतून् ॥ 10  ॥

"Viśwāmitra, the foremost of ascetics, did not resume his respiration for another thousand years. While he kept his respiration suspended, there issued from his head a smoke by which all the three worlds were

thrown into confusion and felt heated as it were. Bewildered by his askesis and overshadowed by his glory, nay, stricken with agony, all the gods, Rṣis and Gandharvas as well as the Nāgas, serpents and ogres thereupon sought the presence of and prayed to Brahmā, the creator, as follows: (8-10)

बहुर्धभः कारणैदैव विश्वामिगे महापुनि: ।

लोपितः कोधितश्रेत तपसा चार्थिवधते ॥ 11  ॥

“Though tempted and provoked to anger through many causes, O lord, the great sage Viswāmitra is rising more and more by virtue of his asceticism. (11)

नहास्य वृजिनं किंचिद् दुर्गयते सूक्ष्ममयुत्।

न दीयते यदि त्वस्य मनसा यदभीपितम् ॥ 12  ॥

विनाशयिति शैतोकयं तपसा सचाराचम्।

व्याकुलाश्र विग्र: सर्वा न च किंचिद्धि प्रकाशते ॥ 13  ॥

"Not even a minute flaw of any description can be seen in him. If, however, that which is keenly sought after by his mind is not granted to him, he is sure to destroy all the three worlds including the animate and inanimate creation by the fire of his askesis. Nay, all the quarters are enveloped in darkness and nothing is clearly visible. (12-13)

सागर: कृष्णिता: सर्वे विशार्यिने च पर्वतः।

प्रकम्पते च वसुधा वायुर्वांतीहं संकुतः ॥ 14 ॥

"All the oceans are turbulent and mountains are being riven. The earth is quaking and the wind is blowing violently at this time. (14)

ग्रहान् न प्रतिज्ञानीमो नासितको जायते जनः ।

सम्मूदमिव शैलेकों सम्प्रक्षुभितमानसम् ॥ 15  ॥

"We are at a loss to discover its remedy, O holy Sir! Like unbelievers people are giving up their sacred duties. With their mind deeply agitated all the three worlds are puzzled. (15)

भारकरो निष्पधश्रि महर्षेस्तय तेजसा।

खूद्रं न कुरते यावकाशे देव महापूर्नि: ॥ 16  ॥



तावत् प्रसादो भागवत्रिहरणो महाधृति: कालाप्रियना यथा पूर्व शैलोकयं द्वहतेप्रखिलम् ॥ 17  ॥

देवाराज्य चिकार्षीते द्वीयतामस्य ययनः।

ततः सुरगाणा: सर्वे पितामहपुरोगामः ॥ 16  ॥

विश्वामित्रं महात्मानं वाक्यं मधुर्मब्रुवन्।

ब्रह्मर्य सवागतं तेउन्तु तपसा स्म सुतोषितः ॥ 19  ॥

"Nay, the sun stands totally eclipsed by the glory of that great Rṣi. The great sage Viśwāmitra, who is fire personified, endowed as he is with unique splendour, O venerable Sir, deserves to be propitiated before he sets his mind on wholesale destruction. Even as all the three worlds were consumed by the fire of universal destruction in the past (at the time of universal dissolution), they may likewise be burnt by him. Therefore, let that very boon be vouchsafed to him, on which his mind is set, even if he seeks to rule over the gods." Thereupon all the hosts of gods with Brahmā (the progenitor of the entire creation) at their head called on and addressed the following sweet words to the high-souled Viśwāmitra : "Hail to you, O Brāhmanā Rṣi ! We are highly pleased with your asceticism.

(16-19)

ब्राहायचं तपसोप्रेण प्रासवानसि कॉशिका।

दीर्घमायुश ते ब्रह्ना ददाति समरुद्रण: ॥ 20  ॥

"You have attained Brahmanhood by virtue of your severe austerities, O son of Kuśika ! Accompanied by hosts of gods, O holy Brāhmaṇa, I further confer longevity on you. (20)

स्वस्ति प्राणृहि भर्ते ने गच्छ सीम्य यथासुरुखम्।

पितामहवचः श्रुत्वा सर्वेधां जिदिवौकासम् ॥ 21  ॥

कृत्वा प्रणामं मृदितो व्याजहार महामृग्न: ।

ब्राहाप्यं यदि मे प्रासं दीर्भामयुस्थेथ च ॥ 22  ॥

उंकारोउथ ववद्कारो वेदाङ्ग वयन्तु माम्।

क्ष्रवेदविदां श्रेष्ठो ब्रह्मवेदविदामपि ॥ 23  ॥

ब्रह्मुपे वसिष्ठो मामेवं वदतु देवता:।

यद्येवं परम: काम: कृती यान्तु सुरर्षभा: ॥ 24  ॥

"Enjoy blessedness and deport according to your pleasure. May good betide

you!" Pleased to hear the benediction of Brahmā and offering salutation to all the gods (lit., denizens of heaven), the great sage Viswāmitra said, "If Brahmanhood as well as long life has been secured by me, let the mystic syllable OM (the key to Self-Knowledge), the sacred word 'Vaṣat' (which is used after the name of the deity to whom an oblation is made at a sacrifice, while pouring an oblation into the sacrificial fire) and the Vedas, which furnish us with details of Self-Knowledge as well as of ritual acts, seek me of their own accord. Let Vasiṣṭha, a mind-born son of Brahmā, the creator, the foremost among the masters of the science of archery etc., (the sciences mastered by the Kṣatriyas) as well as of those mastered by the Brāhmanas (viz., the four Vedas, including the Upaniṣads, that treat of Brāhma, the Infinite), call me as such a Brāhmaṇa, O gods! If this supreme desire of mine is granted by you, depart then, O jewels among gods!" (21-24)

ततः प्रसादितो देवैर्वसिचो जपतां वर:।

सख्ये चकार ब्रह्माधिरेवमास्त्विति चाङबीत् ॥ 25  ॥

Conciliated by the gods, Vasistha, a Brāhmaṇa sage, the foremost among ascetics, thereupon made friends with Viśwāmitra and said, “Amen!” (25)

ब्रहार्थस्वं न संदेहः सर्वे सम्यद्धते तव।

इत्युक्चता देवताश्रापि सर्वा जममुर्थथागतम् ॥ 26  ॥

"You are a Brāhmaṇa seer no doubt. Every desire of your's stands fulfilled!" Saying so, the gods too returned each to his own abode in heaven as they had come. (26)

विश्वामित्रोषि धर्मात्मा लक्ष्वा ब्राह्मणयमुत्तमम्।

पूजयामास ब्रह्मार्थि वसित्ः जपतां वर्णम।। 27 ।।

Having attained the highest status of a Brāhmaṇa, the pious Viśwāmitra too paid his homage to Vasiṣṭha, a Brāhmaṇa sage and the foremost among ascetics. (27)

कृतकामो महीं सर्वा चचार तपसि स्थितः ।

एवं ल्वनेन ब्राह्मण्य प्रात्र सभा महात्मना ॥ 28  ॥

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

“Having realized his ambition of being recognized as a Brâhmana and remaining devoted to his austerities, he traversed the entire globe. In this way, O Rama, was Brahmanhood actually attained (in this very birth without changing his body) by the high-minded Viśwâmitra. (28)

एष राम मुनिश्रिष्ट एष विश्रहावंस्तप:।

एष धर्म: परो नित्यं वीर्यंत्येष परायणम् ॥ 29  ॥

"He is the foremost amongst sages, O Râma! He is asceticism incarnate. He is supreme virtue personified; nay, he is the highest and perennial abode of prowess." (29)

एवमुक्ला महातेजा विरराम हिंजीतम:।

शतानन्दवच: शुत्वा रामलक्ष्मणसंनिधी ॥ 30  ॥

जनकः प्राङ्लिलवंक्यमुवाच कृशिकात्मजम्।

धयोउपस्म्यनुशीतेजस्मि यस्य मे युतिनुगवा ॥ 31  ॥

यजं काकुलथस्विति: प्रासवान्सि कॉशिका ।

पाचितोई त्वया ब्रह्नान् दर्शनेन महामुने ॥ 32  ॥

Saying so, the highly glorious Sátananda, the foremost among Brāhmanas, became silent. Hearing the narration of Sátananda, King Janaka spoke to Viśwamitra (son of Kuśika) with folded-hands in the presence of Śri Rāma and Laksmana as follows: “I am blessed and stand beholden to you, O jewel among sages, in that you have paid a visit to my sacrifice alongwith Śri Rāma and Laksmana (the two scions of Kakuttha), O son of Kuśika! I stand hallowed, O holy Brāhmana, by your sight, O great sage! (30-32)

गृणा बहुविधा: प्रासास्तव संदर्शनान्मय। विस्तरेण च वै ब्रह्ना कौल्यानं महत्तप: ॥ 33  ॥ श्रुतं मया महातेजो रामेण च महात्मना। सदस्ये: प्राय च सदः श्रुतासे बह्वो गृणा: ॥ 34  ॥

"Manifold benefits have been derived by me through your sight at close quarters, inasmuch as on joining this sacrificial assembly with my counsellors today the story of your many great austerities as well as an account of your many virtues, as

being told at length by Śatānanda, has been heard by me, O highly glorious Brāhmaṇa, as well as by the high-souled Śri Rāma. (33-34)

अप्रमेयं तपस्तुभ्यमप्रमेयं च ते बलम्।

अप्रमेया गुणाश्रेव नित्यं ते कुशिकात्मज ॥ 35  ॥

"Unfathomable is your asceticism and immeasurable is your strength. And ever incalculable indeed are your excellences, O son of Kuśika ! (35)

तृसिराश्रवैभूतानां कक्षानां नारित मे विधो।

कर्मकालो मुनिश्रेष्ठ लव्वते रविषण्डलम् ॥ 36  ॥

"I find no satiety in hearing your marvellous stories, O powerful sage! The hour of religious rites to be gone through at dusk, however, is drawing near; the sun is setting, O jewel among sages ! (36)

श्व: प्रभाते महातेजो इद्यमहासि मां पुन:।

स्वागतं जपतां श्रेष्ठ मामनुजातमहासि ॥ 37  ॥

"Tomorrow morning, O highly glorious sage, be pleased to meet me again. Welcome is your advent to my capital, O jewel among ascetics! Kindly grant me leave to depart." (37)

एवमुक्तो मुनिवर: प्रश्रस्य पुरुषर्षभम्।

विससजीषु जनक प्रीतं प्रीतमनास्तदा ॥ 38  ॥

Viśwāmitra, the foremost of sages, felt delighted in his mind on that occasion when addressed in these words. Extolling Janaka, who was all love, he soon allowed that jewel among men to go. (38)

एवमुक्लता मुनिश्रेष्ठं वैदेहो मिथिलाधिप: ।

प्रद्रक्षणं चकाराग्यु सोपाध्यायः सवान्धवः ॥ 39  ॥

Having addressed Viswāmitra (the foremost of sages) as aforesaid, King Janaka (of the Videha dynasty), the ruler of Mithilā, alongwith his family priest and relations quickly went round him clockwise and departed. (39)

विश्वामिजोर्षि यधार्मिता सहराम: सलक्ष्मणः ।

स्ववासमर्भिचक्राम पूच्यमानो महात्मार्भि: ॥ 40  ॥

Accompanied by Śri Rāma and



Lakşmana, Viśwāmitra, whose mind is ever given to piety, retired to his camp, being

extolled even as he went by the exalted souls (that had followed him). (40)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे पत्रषधित्म: सर्ग: ॥ 65  ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-five in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

घटूषिहितम: सर्ग:

Canto LXVI

On Viśwāmitra apprising Janaka of the eagerness of Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa to see his famous bow, Janaka reveals to him its glory and tells him how he got it as well as Sītā and also of his pledge to give her in marriage to Śri Rāma if he would string it

ततः प्रभाते विमले कृतकर्मां नराधिपः।

विश्वामित्र महात्मानमाज्ञाल व सराधवम् ॥ 1  ॥

Having concluded his religious rites for the morning, Janaka, a ruler of men, sent for the high-souled Viśwāmitra alongwith Śri Rāma and Laksmana, the two scions of Raghu, the next day when the day had clearly dawned. (1)

तमचैयित्वा धर्मात्मा शाखदुघटेन कर्मेणा ।

राध्वी च महात्मानौ तदा वाक्यमुवाच इति २ ॥

Having honoured him as well as the high-souled Śri Rama and Lakṣmana, the two scions of Raghu, by means of rites prescribed in our sacred books, the pious soul then spoke to him as follows: so the tradition goes: (2)

भगवन् स्वागतं तेउस्तु किं करोमि तवानघ।।

भवानाज्ययतु मामाज्यो भवता हाहम।। 3  ॥

“Hail to you, O venerable Sir ! Instruct me what I can do for you, O sinless one, since I deserve to be commanded by you.”

(3)

एवमुक्तः स धर्मात्मा जनकेन महात्मना।

प्रत्युवाच मुनिश्रेष्ठो वाक्यं वाक्यविश्रापादः ॥ 4  ॥

Addressed in these words by the high-

souled Janaka, the pious and celebrated Viśwāmitra, a jewel among sages and a master of expression, replied as follows: (4)

पुत्री द्रशस्येमी क्रियों लोकविश्रुतो।

इर्कुकामी धनु:श्रेष्ठं यदेतत्वयि तिच्छति ॥ 5  ॥

"These two Ksatriya princes, sons of Emperor Daśaratha, who are well-known throughout the world, are eager to see the superb bow which is now with you. (5)

एतद् दर्शय भई ने कृतकामी नृपात्मजी ।

दर्शनादस्य धनुषो यथेधं प्रतियास्यतः ॥ 6  ॥

"Please show it to them; may good betide you! With their desire fulfilled through the sight of this bow the two princes will return as they would." (6)

एवमुक्तसु जनकः प्रत्युवाच महामुनिम्।

श्रयतामस्य धनुषो यदर्थिमह तिक्तति ॥ 7  ॥

Urged in these words, Janaka for his part replied as follows to Viśwāmitra, the eminent sage: “Hear the tale of this bow, wherefore it lies here in my charge. (7)

देवरात इति ख्यातो निमेच्येछो महापिति: । न्यासोउं तस्य भगवन् हतेरे दोमी महामना: ॥ 8  ॥

“Nimi’s eldest son was known as King

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

Devaráta. This bow, O venerable sage, was deposited as a trust in the hands of that exalted soul by the gods. (8)

दक्षयत्रबधे पूर्वं धनुरायन्य बीर्वेबान्।

रूऋस्तु विदशान् रोषात् सलीलमिदमबलौत्।। 9 1 ।

“Pulling the string of this bow in sport with the purpose of wrecking the sacrifice of Dakṣa in the olden days, the valiant Lord Rudra (the god of destruction) for his part angrily spoke to the gods as follows: (9)

यस्माद् भागाधिनो भागं नाकल्यवत मे सुरा:।

वराज्ञानि महाह्राणि धनुषा शातयामि व: ॥ 10  ॥

"Since you have not set apart a share of the sacrificial offerings for me, even though I desired it, O gods, I shall just sever your most adorable heads with this bow (and arrow)." (10)

ततो विमनसः सर्वे देवा वै मुनिपुज्ञः।

प्रसाद्यन्त देतेशं तेमां प्रीते3भवद् भवः ॥ 11  ॥

"Getting discomposed, all the gods thereupon conciliated Lord Śankara, the suzerain Ruler of gods, O jewel among sages, and Śiva (the Source of the universe) got eventually pleased with them. (11)

प्रतियुक्तस्तु सर्वेधां ददौ तेभां महात्मनाम्।

तदेतद् देवदेवस्य धनूतलं महात्मनः ॥ 12  ॥

न्यासभृतं तदा न्यतमस्माकं पूर्वेजे विभी ।

अथ मे कृपत: क्षेत्रं लंगलादूष्टिता ततः ॥ 13  ॥

क्षेत्रं शोधयता लब्धा नाभा सोतेति विश्वृता ।

भूतलादूष्टिता सा तु व्यवधेत मामतबा ॥ 14  ॥

“Full of grace, He bestowed the bow upon all those high-souled gods. Then that celebrated jewel among bows was deposited by them as a trust with our powerful forefather, Devarāta. Immediately after that there arose from the track of the ploughshare, even as I was ploughing the plot set apart for a sacrifice, a female baby, who, was discovered while I was dressing the field and as such was widely known by the

name of Sitā*. That daughter of mine, who had emerged from the soil, gradually grew at an extraordinary pace in my care. (12-14)

वीर्यूल्केति मे कन्या स्थापितेयमयोगिना।

भूतलादुस्थितां तां तु वधंमानां ममात्मजामू॥ 15  ॥

वरयामासुरगाय राजानो मुनिपुंगव।

तेषां वरयतां कन्यां सर्वैं पृथिवीक्षितामू॥ 16  ॥

वीर्यूल्केति भगवन् न ददामि सुताममू।

ततः सर्वे नृपतयः समेय मुनिपुंगव॥ 17  ॥

मिधिलामयपुगामव कीर्वीं जिज्ञासवस्तदा।

तेषां जिज्ञासमानांग शैंवं धनुरूपाह्मूम्॥ 18  ॥

"This daughter of mine, who was not born (in the ordinary way) from the mother's womb, was kept by me for being given in marriage to a suitor who would win her by his valour. Rulers of lands approached me and sued for the hand of my aforesaid daughter, who had appeared from the soil and was growing at an unusual pace, O jewel among sages ! I, however, did not give away my daughter to any, telling all the kings who sued for the hand of my girl that she could only be won through personal valour. Thereupon all the kings (lit., rulers of men) came to Mithilā in a body and inquired of the standard by which their prowess was going to be judged, O jewel among sages ! Then the bow of Lord Śiva was brought before the inquisitive princes. (15-18)

न शेकुर्यिंहणे तस्य धनुस्तोलनेप्रि वा ।

तेषां वीर्यैवर्ता वीर्यैमल्यं ज्ञाला महामुने || ११ ॥

प्रत्याख्याता नृपतयस्त्रिबोधि तपोधन ।

ततः परमकोपेन राजानो मृनिपुंगव || २० ॥

अऊन्धन् मिधित्वा सर्वे वीर्यसंद्रह्मगाताः ।

आत्मानमवधृतं मे विज्ञाय नृपपुंगालः ॥ 21  ॥

रोषेण महात्राउत्रविध्याः पीडवन् मिधित्वां पुरीम् ।

ततः संवल्सरे पूर्णे क्षयं यातानि सर्वशः ॥ 22  ॥

साधानानि मुनिश्रष्ठ ततोड़ं भुगतुःलिखतः ।

ततो देवरणाग्नु सर्वस्तपसाई प्रसादयम् ॥ 23  ॥

* The word ‘Sitā’ in Sanskrit originally conveyed the sense of the furrow of a ploughshare.



"They, however, could not even support it, much less toss it in order to be able to ascertain its weight. Perceiving as I did the prowess of those princes, who claimed great prowess, to be deficient, O eminent sage, those rulers of men were rejected by me. Now hear what they did next, O sage rich in asceticism! "Their prowess having been called in question, all the kings in extreme anger thereupon besieged Mithilā, O jewel among sages! Considering themselves as having been insulted by me and, therefore, filled with great anger, those jewels among kings inflicted suffering on the city of Mithilā. Consequent on that siege, at the end of a full twelve month all my resources got depleted, O jewel among sages! As a result of that I felt very wretched. Thereupon I propitiated through askesis all the hosts of gods. (19-23)

दद्धुश परमप्रीताश्रुतैगबलं सुरा:।

तते भगा नृपतयो हन्यमाना दिशो ययु: ॥ 24  ॥

अवीर्वाँ वीर्वसैद्धधा: सामाल्या: पापकाक्रिण: ।

तदेतन्मुनिशादूलं धनु: परमभास्वरम् ॥ 25  ॥

रामलक्ष्मणयोश्रापि दर्शश्च्यापि सूत्रत ।

यश्य स्नुचो राम: कुर्बाद्रोपेणं मुने ।

सुतामयोनिजां सीतां दद्यां दाशराधेरहम् ॥ 26  ॥

"Nay, extremely pleased, the gods conferred on me an army complete in all its four limbs, viz., the horse, elephants, chariots and infantry. Being hard hit by that army and completely routed, the villainous princes/ kings, who lacked in valour or whose prowess was called in question, thereupon fled with their ministers in various directions. I shall certainly show the aforesaid most resplendent and celebrated bow, O tiger among ascetics, to Śri Rāma and Lakṣmana as well, O sage of noble vows ! If Rāma strings this bow, O sage, I promise to give away my daughter, Sitā, who was not born of a mother's womb, to the aforesaid son of Daśaratha." (24-26)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोंये आदिकल्ये बालकाण्डे प्रदृष्टितम: सर्ग: || ६६ ||

Thus ends Canto Sixty-six in the Bâlakāndā of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

ससष्टितम: सर्गी:

Canto LXVII

Urged by Viśwāmitra, Śri Rāma bends the bow, sent by Janaka to the sacrificial hall, in order to string it and in the process breaks it, whereupon Janaka with the concurrence of Viśwāmitra sends his counsellors to Ayodhyā to invite Emperor Dāśaratha for the wedding

जनकस्य वचः श्रुत्वा विश्वामिजो महामुपिनः ।

धनुद्रंशय रामाय इति होवाच पार्थियम् ॥ 1  ॥

Hearing the narration of Janaka, the eminent sage Viśwāmitra, so the tradition goes, said to the aforesaid king, “Please show the bow to Rāma.” (1)

ततः स राजा जनकः सचिवान् व्यादिदेश ह।

धनुरानीयतां दिख्यं गन्धमात्यानुलेपितम् ॥ 2  ॥

Thereupon the celebrated King Janaka gladly instructed as follows his counsellors sitting by his side: "Let the heavenly bow, adorned with sandal-paste and flowers, be brought here." (2)

जनकेन समादिष्टा: सचिवा: प्राविशन् पुरम्।

तब्द्रु: पुरतः कृत्वा निज़ंभूर्मितीज्ञ: ॥ 3  ॥

Commanded by Janaka, his counsellors,

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

who were possessed of immense glory, entered the city and, placing the bow ahead, came out of the city. (3)

नृपां शतानि पश्राश्द् व्यायतानां महात्मानम्।

मझूषामष्टचक्रां तां समूहुते कथंचन ॥ 4  ॥

Five thousand unusually tall and well-built men somehow managed to propel the chest containing the bow, mounted on eight wheels. (4)

तामादाय सुमझुषामायसीं यत्र तद्धनु:।

सुरोमपं ते जनकमूचुनुपतिमतिजण: ॥ 5  ॥

Taking with them that iron chest of good design, in which the said bow had been placed, those counsellors of the king said to Janaka, who resembled a god in lustre : (5)

इदं धनुर्वरं राजन् पूजितं सर्वराजन्धः ।

मिशिलाधि राजेन्द्र दर्शनीयं वरीच्छसि ॥ 6  ॥

"This superb bow, O king, which is worshipped by all the kings, may kindly be shown to Śri Rāma and Lakṣmana, if you will, O ruler of Mithilā, O king of kings!" (6) तेषां नृपो वचः श्रुता कृताझलिनघात। विश्वामित्र महात्मानं तावुभौ रामलक्ष्मणो ॥ 7  ॥

Hearing their prayer, the king submitted with folded-hands to the high-souled Viśwāmitra and both the aforesaid princes, Śri Rāma and Lakṣmana : (7)

इर्वे धनुर्वे ब्रह्मुकनेरिभपूर्तिन्।

राजभिश्र महावीवैरशकैः पूर्तितं तदा ॥ 8  ॥

"This excellent bow, O holy Brāhmaṇa, has been worshipped by the Janakas and extolled by kings, who were unable to bend it, though they were very powerful. (8)

नैतत् सुरगणा: सर्वे सासुरा न च राक्षसा:।

गन्धवैयक्षप्रवरा: सिक्रजरमहोरगा: ॥ 9  ॥

क्व गतिमानुर्गाणां च भतुषोउस्य प्रपूर्णे।

आरोपणे समायोगे वेपने तोलने तथा ॥ 10  ॥

"Not even hosts of gods including demons nor ogres nor the foremost of Gandharvas and Yakṣas including Kinnaras

and great Nāgas were able to string it. How then can there be any capacity in poor human beings to bend this bow, string it, fit an arrow to it, vibrate its string and toss it in their palms in order to estimate its weight? (9-10)

तदेत्तू धनुषां श्रेष्ठमानीतं मुपिनुपाव ।

दर्शयैतन्महाभाग अनयो राजपुत्रयो: ॥ 11  ॥

"This bow, the best of all, has been brought before you, O jewel among sages! Kindly show it now, O highly blessed one, to these two princess." (11)

विश्वामित्र: सरामस्तु श्रुता जनकभाधिसत्।

वत्स राम धनु: पश्य इति राघवमब्रवीत् ॥ 12  ॥

Hearing the request of Janaka alongwith Śri Rāma, Viśwāmitra spoke to the latter as follows : “Child Rāma, behold the bow !”(12)

महर्षेक्रवान्द रामो यत्र तिष्ठति तद्धतुः ।

मझुषां तामपाव्यून दृष्ट्वा धनुर्धाब्बिति ॥ 13  ॥

Opening at the instance of Viśwāmitra, the eminent seer, the chest in which the famous bow lay encased, and beholding the bow, Śri Rama forthwith said: (13)

इर्दे धनुर्विं दिल्वं संस्पूशामीह पाणिणा।

यत्नवांश्र भविष्यामि तोलने पूर्णेशपि वा ॥ 14  ॥

"I hereby hold with my hand this excellent heavenly bow and shall try to toss it on my palms and even to bend it." (14)

बाढमित्यबबीदूरा राजा मुनिश्र समभाषत ।

तीलया स धानुमैंये जग्राह वचनामनुः ॥ 15  ॥

"Amen!" said the king and the sage too dittoed the remark. At the instance of the sage Śri Rāma sportfully seized the bow at the middle. (15)

पश्यतां नृसहस्राणां बहूनां रघुनन्दनः।

आरोपयत् स धर्मात्मा सलीलमिव तद्धनुः ॥ 16  ॥

Nay, the celebrated scion of Raghu, whose mind is given to righteousness, strung that bow as though in sport while a great mass of populace stood looking on. (16)

आरोपयित्वा मौर्वीं च पुरयामास तद्धनुः।

तद् बधझ्न धनुमंध्ये नरश्रेष्ठी महायशा: ॥ 1 1  ॥

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

Having set the string to the bow, the highly illustrious Śri Rama, a jewel among men, bent the said bow and lo! the bow broke into two at the middle. (17)

तस्य शब्दो महानासीक्षितसमिनः:स्वनः।

भूमिकम्यछु सुमहान् पर्वतस्येव दीयत: ११८ ॥

A great noise reverberating like a crash of thunder issued from it even as it broke and a violent earthquake followed in its wake as it would in the event of a mountain cracking. (18)

निपेर्छु नरा: सर्वे तेन शब्देन मोहिता:।

वर्जयित्वा मुनिवरं राजानं तौ च राषवौ ॥ 11  ॥

Nay, stunned by that crash all men (present there) toppled down, barring, of course, Viśwāmitra, the foremost of sages, the king and the two celebrated scions of Raghu. (19)

प्रत्याश्वले जने तिम्मन् राजा विनातसाध्वस: ।

उवाच प्राझुलिवकंय वाक्यजो मुनिपुंगवम् ॥ 20  ॥

On the people there recovering from the shock and feeling reassured, the king, whose misgivings had now been set at rest, and who knew how to speak, submitted with joined palms to Viśwāmitra, the foremost of sages, as follows: (20)

भगवन् दृष्टवीयों में रामो दशरथात्मजः।

अत्यब्दुतमचित्यं च अतर्कितमिदं मया ॥ 21  ॥

"The prowess of Śri Rāma, son of Dáśaratha, has been witnessed by me. The feat performed by him is most marvellous, inconceivable and was never thought of by me. (21)

जनकानां कुले कांतिमाहरिष्यति मे सुता।

सीता भर्तीमासादा रामं दुर्शराधतमम् ॥ 22  ॥

“Having secured Śrī Rāma, son of Emperor Dāśaratha, for her husband, my

daughter, Sitā, will fetch renown to the race of the Janakas. (22)

मम सल्या प्रतिज्ञा सा वीयशुल्केति कोशिका ।

सीता प्राणौबैंहुमता देश रामाय मे सुता ॥ 23  ॥

"My pledge that Sitā can be won only through valour stands redeemed today, O son of Kuśika ! My daughter, Sitā, who is dearer to me than life, now remains to be given away. (23)

भवतोउनुमते ब्रह्ना शीर्ष गच्छून् मन्थिणः।

मम कोलिषक भई ते अयोध्यां त्वरिता रथेः ॥ 24  ॥

"With your permission, O holy Brahmana, let my counsellors quickly proceed, O son of Kuśika, to Ayodhyā in chariots with expedition; may god bless you! (24)

राजानं प्रधितेवांक्वैरानयन्तु पूरं मम।

प्रदानं वीयेशुल्कायाः कथयन्तु च सर्वशः ॥ 25  ॥

"Let them with polite words bring the Emperor to my catpal and tell him exhaustively how Sitā having been won through valour is going to be married to Śri Rāma. (25)

भुनीगुगी च काकुत्स्थी कथयन्तु नृपाय वै।

प्रीतियुक्ते तु राजानमानयन्तु सुशीष्रगा: ॥ 26  ॥

"Let them also speak of the two scions of Kakutstha being well looked after by the sage (yourself) and let them bring the Emperor, full of delight, poste-haste to Mithilā." (26)

कॉशिकस्तु तथैल्याह राजा चाभाथ्य मन्धिणः ।

अयोध्यां प्रेषवामास धर्मात्मा कृतशासान्न्।

यथावृतं समाख्यातुमानेतु च नृपं तथा ॥ 27  ॥

The son of Kuśika, Viśwāmitra, for his part said, “Amen!” And, summoning his counsellors, the pious king despatched them with instructions to narrate at length everything precisely as it had happened, as well as to bring the Emperor to Mithilā. (27)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोरो आदिकाव्ये बालकाराएं ससपष्टितम: सर्ग: ॥ 67  ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-seven in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

अष्टष्टितम: सर्ग:

Canto LXVIII

Reaching Ayodhyā, the counsellors of Janaka tell Daśaratha how Śri Rama broke the bow of Lord Śiva in Janaka's custody and won the hand of his daughter, and convey to him their master's invitation for the wedding, on which Daśaratha makes up his mind in consultation with Vasisṭha to depart for Mithilā at an early date

जनकेन समादिष्टा दूतासे क्लानतवाहना:।

त्रिरासमुषिता मार्गे तेउयोध्या प्राविश्नन् पुरीम् ॥ 1  ॥

Commanded by Janaka, the aforesaid counsellors sent as envoys halted for three days on the way, their horses being exhausted, and then they entered the city of Ayodhya. (1)

ते राजवचनाद् गत्वा राजवेणप्र प्रवेशिताः ।

द्वरुर्दैवसंकाशं वृद्धे द्वराशं नृमम् ॥ 2  ॥

Proceeding to the royal palace, they were ushered into the court under orders of the king and beheld there the aged King Daśaratha, who looked like a god. (2)

बढ्धाङ्गलिपुटा: सर्वे दूता वियातसाध्वसा: ।

राजनं प्रश्रितं वाक्यमबुहन्नं मयुगक्षनम् ॥ 3  ॥

All the envoys, whose feeling of awe had altogether disappeared, thanks to the benign look and amiable disposition of Dásaratha, made the following polite and sweetly-worded submission to the king:

(3)

मैथिलो जनको राजा साम्रिकोयुरस्कृत: ।

मुदुर्भुरुभैर्या स्नेहसंरत्का गिरा ॥ 4  ॥

कुशलं चाचय्यं चैव सोपाध्यायपुरोहितम्।

जनकस्तं महाराज पृष्ठते सपुरःसर्म ॥ 5  ॥

"With the sacred fire placed before him and in a polite language imbued with affection, O monarch, King Janaka, the ruler of Mithilā and a source of happiness to his people, has again and again enquired after your undecaying welfare (through our mouth), as also after that of your preceptor and family priest as well as of your attendants. (4-5)

पृष्ट्वा कुशलमध्यर्थे वैदेहो मिथिलाधिप:।

कॉशिकानुमते वावयं भवन्तमिदमब्रवीत् ॥ 6  ॥

"Enquiring after your undisturbed welfare, King Janaka, of the Videha dynasty, the ruler of Mithilā, has with the consent of Viśwāmitra (son of Kuśika) sent you the following message : (6)

पूर्व प्रतिज्ञा विदिता वीयशूलका मामतमजा ।

राजान्छ कृतामपां निर्वीवां विमुखीकृता: ॥ 9  ॥

“My pledge that my daughter shall be won only through valour must already be known to you, as also the fact that kings lacking in strength (that could enable them to pass the test) were repulsed, even though they resented it. (7)

सेवं मम सुता राजन् विश्वामिवप्ररुकृते: ।

यदुच्छ्यासगते राजन् निर्िता तत पुत्रकै: ॥ 8  ॥

"This celebrated daughter of mine, O illustrious king, has been decisively won by your beloved and worthy son, Śri Rāma, who arrived through my good luck at my capital with sage Viśwāmitra as his guide. (8)

तच्च रतं धनुर्दियं मध्ये धर्म महात्मना ।

रामेण हि महाबाहो महत्वां जनसंसदि ॥ 9  ॥

“Nay, that superb heavenly bow of Lord Śiva was actually broken at the middle by the high-souled Śri Rāma in the midst of a huge concourse of men, O long-armed one! (9)

अस्पे देया मया सीता वीर्थेगूल्का महात्मने ।

प्रतिज्ञा तत्नुभिच्छामि तदनुज्ञानुभहिंस ॥ 10  ॥

“Sitā, my daughter, who has thus been won through personal valour, now remains

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

to be given away by me to that exalted soul. By doing so I seek to redeem my pledge. Be pleased to sanction it. (10)

सोपाध्यायो महाराज पुरोहितपुरस्कृत:।

शीप्रभागच्छ भयं ते रुद्यमहींस राज्यो ॥ 11  ॥

“ ‘Accompanied by your preceptor and placing the family priest at your head, O great king, come soon and be pleased to behold Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, the two scions of Raghu; may God bless you ! (11) प्रतित्रां मम राजेन्द्र निर्वर्तीयतुमहींस । पुत्रयोक भयोरेव प्रीति त्वमुपलप्यसे ॥ 12  ॥

“You ought to bring my pledge to completion, O king of kings! In this way you will witness the joyous mood of both your sons. (12)

एवं विदेहाधिपतिमंधुर्ने वाक्यमब्रवीत्।

विश्वामित्रायभ्यनुज्ञातः शतानन्दमते स्थितः ॥ 13  ॥

“Seconded by Viśwamitra and abiding by the advice of Sátananda, the ruler of the Videha territory has addressed such sweet words to you.” (13)

दूतवाक्यं तु तच्छुला राजा परमहर्षितः ।

वसिष्डं वामदेवं च मन्निणश्रेवमब्रवीत् ॥ 14  ॥

Supremely delighted to hear the aforesaid submission of the envoys of Janaka, king Dáśaratha addressed the sages, Vasiṣṭha and Vamadeva, as well as his counsellors in the following words : (14)

गूप: कृषिकापुंरण कौसल्यानन्दबर्ध:।

लक्ष्मणेन सह भाता विद्रेषु वसल्यसो ॥ 15  ॥

"Looked after by Viśwāmitra, son of

Kuśika, Śrī Rāma, who enhances the joy of Kausalyā by his presence is sojourning at present in the kingdom of the Videhas alongwith his brother, Lakṣmana. (15)

दृष्टवीयन्तु काकुत्थो जनकेन महात्मना।

सम्पदानं सुतायास्तु राघवे कतुर्मिच्छति ॥ 16  ॥

"The prowess of Śrī Rāma, the ornament of Kakuttha's race, has been witnessed by the high-souled Janaka, who accordingly desires to give away his daughter to Śrī Rāma, a jewel of Raghu's race. (16) यदि वो रोचते वृत्तं जनकस्य महात्मनः ।

पूरीं गच्छामहे शीर्भे मा भृत् कालस्य पर्यव्ये: ॥ 17  ॥

"If the family history and the mode of life of the high-souled Janaka commends itself to you, let us proceed at once to his capital, Mithilā, and let there be no loss of time." (17)

मन्चिणो बाढमित्याहु: सह सर्वैमहर्शिभः ।

सुप्रीतश्राब्बित् राजा श्वो यात्रेत च मन्चिणः ॥ 18  ॥

The counsellors and all the great seers said, “Amen!” And highly pleased, the king, Daśaratha, too said to the counsellors, “Let the journey be commenced tomorrow.” (18)

मन्चिणस्तु नेरेन्द्रस्य रात्रिं परमसल्कृता:।

ऊषु: प्रभूदिता: सर्वे गृणै: सर्वे: समान्विता: ॥ 11  ॥

Greately delighted to hear of the king's decision and highly honoured by Dásaratha, all the counsellors of King Janaka, who were richly endowed with all excellences befitting a king's counsellor, halted for the night at Ayodhyā. (19)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकोये आदिकाळ्ये

बालकाण्डे उद्यथितम: सर्ग: ॥ 68  ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-eight in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

[Unreadable]



एकोनससिततम: सर्गै:

Canto LXIX

With a large number of followers, Daśaratha proceeds to Mithilā for the wedding and is received with signal honour by Janaka and his people and comfortably lodged

ततो राज्यां व्यतीतायां सोपाध्याय: सबान्यव:।

राजा द्वशस्थे हूरः: सुमन्धिमदम्बबोत्।। 1  ॥

Then, on the night being over, King Daśaratha, who was closeted with his preceptor and relations, joyously summoned and addressed Sumantra, his favourite and trusted minister, as follows : (1)

अष्ट सर्वे धनाध्यक्षा धनमादाय पुक्लतम्।

ब्रजन्वये सुविहिता नानारबसम्विता: ॥ 2  ॥

"Taking with them abundant riches and richly provided with various kinds of precious stones and duly protected by armed guards, let all treasury officers proceed ahead today.

(2)

चतुरंगवलं चापि शीधं नियांतु सर्वश: ।

ममाजासमकालं च यानं युयमनुतमम् ॥ 3  ॥

"Let the army consisting of all its four limbs (viz., the horse, chariots, elephants and infantry) sally forth, as soon as they receive my order, as also the whole lot of palanquins etc., as well as other conveyances, chariots etc., superbly appointed. (3)

वसिष्ठो वामदेवश्र जाबालिरस्थ करयप: । मार्कण्डोयस्तु दीर्घयुर्द्रधि: कात्यायनस्तथा ॥ 4  ॥ एते द्विजा: प्रयान्तयो स्यन्दन योजयस्व मे । यथा कालात्ययो न स्यादू दुता हि त्वयक्ति मामू ॥ 5  ॥

"Let these Brāhmanas—Vasistha and Vāmadeva as well as Jābāli, Kaśyapa as also the long-lived Mārkandeya and Sage Kātyāyana go ahead in palanquins or chariots; and also get ready my chariot so that there may be no delay, since the envoys are urging me to make haste." (4-5)

वचनाच्च नोरंत्रस्य सेना च चतुर्विणी।।

राजानमृषिधि: सार्थ ब्रजतं पृचतोउव्यात्॥ 6  ॥

In pursuance of the royal command the army consisting of all its four limbs marched close behind the king himself driving along with the sages, each in his own conveyance. (6)

गला चतुरं मार्ग विद्वानभ्युपेयिवान्।

राजा च जनकः श्रीमान् श्रुला पुजामकल्पयत् ॥ 9  ॥

Driving along the road for four days, he entered the territory of the Videhas. The moment the glorious King Janaka heard of Dáśaratha's advent, he set about preparing for his reception. (7)

ततो राजनामासादा वृद्धं दशारधं नृपम्।

मुदितो जनको राजा प्रहर्ष परमं ययो ॥ 8  ॥

Then, approaching the aged King Dáśaratha, a protector of men, King Janaka, already full of joy, experienced supreme felicity. (8)

उवाच वचनं श्रेष्ठो नराशेष्ठं मुद्रावित्यम्।

स्वागतं ते नराश्रेष्ठ दिष्ट्या प्रासो3स राघव ॥ 9  ॥

The extremely noble Janaka submitted as follows to the delighted Dáśaratha, the foremost among men: “Welcome is your advent to my capital, O jewel among men! It is through my good luck that you have come, O scion of Raghu! (9)

पूत्रयोरभयो: प्रीति लप्यस्यो वीर्यिनर्जितान्।

दिह्पा प्राप्तो महातेजा वसित्धो भगवानूषि: ॥ 10  ॥

सह सर्वैहिंत्रजश्छेदैवैरिव शक्ततु: ।

दिह्पा मे निर्फिता विश्रा दिह्पा मे पूर्णितं कुलम् ॥ 11  ॥

राघवै: सह सम्बन्धात् वीर्यश्रेभेहावलै: ।

श्व: प्रभाते नेत्रेत त्वं संवर्तयितभूमहसि ॥ 12  ॥

यत्रास्यन्ते नरश्रेष्ठ दिवाहामूषिसन्तमे: ।

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुला ऋषियमध्ये नराधिधः ॥ 13  ॥

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

वाक्यं वाक्यविदां श्रेष्ठ: प्रत्युवाच महीपतिन्।

प्रतिघ्रो दातुवशः श्रुतमेतन्मया पुरा ॥ 14  ॥

"You will witness here the joyous mood of both your sons, Śri Rāma and Lakṣmana, acquired through personal prowess. It is through my good fortune again that the highly glorious and exceedingly powerful sage Vasistha has come alongwith all the jewels among Brāhmanas even as Indra, who attained the rulership of gods by virtue of his having performed a full one hundred horse sacrifices in his past life, would in the company of gods. Fortunately enough all obstacles that stood in the way of Sita's marriage have been thoroughly overcome and luckily for me, my race has been exalted through matrimonial alliance with the very mighty scions of Raghu, distinguished for their valour. The following morning, at the conclusion of the sacrifice, O ruler of men, you ought to celebrate the wedding with the help of the foremost of sages, O jewel among men!" Hearing the aforesaid submission of Janaka in the midst of the Rsis, Dasaratha, the paramount ruler of men, the foremost of those who know how to speak, replied as follows to king Janaka: "The execution of a gift depends on the donor: this has been heard by me in the past. (10-14)

यथा वक्ष्यसि धर्मत्र तत् करिष्यामहे वयम्।

तद् धर्मिचं यश्यरं च वचनं सत्वावित्र: ॥ 15  ॥

श्रुत्वा विदेहाधिपति: परं विस्मयमागतः।

ततः सवै मुनिणगा: परस्यरसामागमे ॥ 16  ॥

हर्षेण महता युक्तासां रात्रिमवसन् सुखम्।

अथ रामो महतैला लक्ष्मणेन समं ययौ ॥ 17  ॥

विश्वामित्रं पुरस्कृत्य मितु: पादावुपस्थग्न।

राजा च राधवी पुत्रौ निशाम्य परिहर्षितः ॥ 18  ॥

उवास परमप्रीतो जनकेनारभपूजितः ।

जनको2पि महतोजा: क्रिया धर्मे तत्ववित्।

यत्रस्य च सुताध्यां च कृत्वा रात्रिमुवास ह॥ 19  ॥

"We shall do as you will bid us do, O knower of what is right!" Janaka, the ruler of the territory of the Videhas, was filled with great astonishment to hear that most pious reply of the truthful monarch, which was conducive to glory. Filled with great delight at their meeting with one another, all the hosts of sages assembled there thereupon spent that night happily. Placing Viśwāmitra at his head, the highly glorious Śri Rāma with Lakṣmana then proceeded to touch the feet of his father. Greatly delighted to behold his two sons, the ornaments of Raghu's race, and honoured in every way by Janaka, king Dásaratha retired for the night full of great joy. Having concluded with piety the rites connected with the sacrifice which was being performed by him as well as those positively conducive to the good of his two daughters, Sita and Ürmilā, who were now going to be married, Janaka, a knower of the truth, retired for the night: so the tradition goes. (15-19)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमहमायणे वात्मीकीये आदिकाज्ये बालकाण्डे

एकोनससतितम: सर्ग: १ ६ ९ ॥

Thus ends Canto Sixty-nine in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

[Unreadable]



སསོལྡོན་: སགོ:

Canto LXX

Janaka sends for his younger brother, Kuśadhwaja, from Śaṅkāsyā. Invited by him, Daśaratha meets Janaka at the latter's palace, where at the instance of Daśaratha, Vasiṣṭha glorifies the race of Ikṣwāku

ततः प्रभाते जनकः कृतकर्मां महर्धिभः ।

उवाच वाक्यं वाक्यस्तः शतानन्दं पुरोहितम् ॥ 1  ॥

Having gone through the concluding rites connected with the sacrifice undertaken by him with the help of eminent Rsis, the following morning, Janaka, who knew how to articulate, spoke to his family priest, Śatānanda, as follows: (1)

भाता मम महातेजी वीर्यवान्तिधार्मिकः।

कुशश्वज इति ख्यात: पुरीमध्यवसच्छुभाम् ॥ 2  ॥

वार्यफलकपर्यन्तों पिवब्रिक्षमूर्ती नदीम्।

संकाशयां पुण्यसंकाशां विभानमिव पुचकम् ॥ 3  ॥

"My highly glorious, valiant and extremely pious younger brother, known by the name of Kuśadhwaja, has taken up his abode in the blessed city of Sānkāsyā—vying with heaven (the reward of virtue) and extensive as the aerial car Puspaka (belonging to Kubera, the god of riches), nay, whose boundaries are marked out by a defensive wall mounted by engines—and drinks the water of the river Ikṣumati. (2-3)

तमहं रुद्धुमिष्ठधि यज्ञोगास स मे मतः।

प्रीति सोप्रि महातेजा इमां भोक्ता मया सह॥ 4  ॥

"He is the guardian of my sacrifice (inasmuch as it is he who procured materials for the sacrifice though living in Sānkāsyā); hence I long to see him. That highly glorious brother of mine too will share with me this delight of witnessing the wedding of my two daughters." (4)

एवमुने तु वचने शतानन्दस्य संनिधी।

आगता: केचिद्वल्या जनकस्तान् समादिश्ता ॥ 5  ॥

When these words were uttered by

Janaka in the presence of Sátananda, some level-headed messengers turned up and Janaka duly instructed them. (5)

शासनात् तु नेरन्न्य प्रययुः शीष्रवातिजिधः।

समानेतु नरव्याधं विध्णगमिन्द्रज्ञाय यथा ॥ 6  ॥

"Like Indra's men proceeding under his orders to bring his younger brother Upendra or the divine Dwarf, they rode at the king's command on swift horses to bring Kuśadhwaja, a tiger among men." (6)

संकाशयां ते समाग्य ददूगृछ्ध कुशब्बजम्।

न्यवेदयन् यथावृतं जनकस्य च चितन्तिम।। 7  ॥

Reaching Śankāśyā they met Kuśadhwaja and correctly made known to him the tidings at Mithilā as well as what was contemplated by Janaka. (7)

तद्वृत्तं नृपति: श्रुत्वा दृतश्रेष्ठमैक्षानं:।

आज्ञा तु नोरन्त्रस्य आजगाम कुशाक्षज: ॥ 6  ॥

Hearing the story of Janaka as told by the foremost of his envoys, who were very swift-footed, Kuśadhwaja turned up immediately in obedience to the king's command. (8)

स दर्शर्षे महात्मानं जनकं धर्मवललम्।

सोर्पभवाठा शतानन्दं जनकं चातिथामिकम् ॥ 9  ॥

राजाई परमं दिव्यमासनं सोउध्योहत।

उपविष्टावृषी तौ नु भात्राविमतयूती ॥ 10  ॥

प्रेषयामासतुवौरी मत्रवश्रेष्ठं सुदामनम्।

गच्छ मत्प्रियते शीघ्रमिव्रकुममितप्रभम् ॥ 11  ॥

आत्मजैः सह दुर्धर्षमानयस्त्र स्मान्धिणम्।

ओपिवार्याँ स गत्वा तु रघूराणां कुलवधनम् ॥ 12  ॥

ददर्श शिरसा चेनमभिव्योदमवर्षित्।

अयोध्याधिपत वीर वैदेहो मिथिलाधिपः ॥ 13  ॥



<table><tr><td>स लां रूटुं व्यविस्तः सोपाध्यायपुरोहितम्।</td></tr><tr><td>मन्रश्रष्ठवचः श्रुला राजा सर्पिणगत्सक्षा ॥ 14  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>सब्धूरगमत् तत्र जनको यत्र वर्तेत्।</td></tr><tr><td>राजा च मन्रिसहितः सोपाध्यायः सब्धान्वः ॥ 15  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>वाक्यं वाक्यविदां श्रेष्ठो वैदेहमिदमब्रवीत्।</td></tr><tr><td>विविद्तं ते महाराज इंश्वाकुकुलदैवतम् ॥ 16  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>वक्ता सर्वेषु कृत्येषु वसिष्ठो भपवानृषि: ।</td></tr><tr><td>विश्वाविमिश्राभ्यन्तुङातः सह सर्वैमहर्शिभ: ॥ 17  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>एष वध्य्यिति धर्मात्या वसिष्ठो मे यथाक्रमम्।</td></tr><tr><td>नृणर्गभूते दर्शगर्थे वसिष्ठो भगवानृषि: ॥ 18  ॥</td></tr><tr><td>उवाच वाक्यं वाक्यजो वैदेहं सपुरोधसम्।</td></tr><tr><td>अत्यक्रप्रभवो ब्रह्ना शाग्यतो नित्य अव्यय: ॥ 19  ॥</td></tr></table>

He saw the high-souled Janaka, who was a lover of righteousness; and greeting Šatananda as well as the most pious Janaka, he took his seat on a most wonderful throne worthy of kings. Having both sat down, the valiant brothers, who were possessed of infinite glory, called and commanded Sudāmana, the foremost of their counsellors, in the following words: “Proceed quickly, O chief of counsellors, to the formidable King Daśaratha, a scion of Ikswāku, of limitless glory and bring him alongwith his sons and counsellors.” Going to the lodging of King Daśaratha, of course he saw Daśaratha, the promoter of the race of the Raghus, and, greeting him with his head bent low, submitted as follows: “The celebrated King Janaka, belonging to the line of the Videhas, the ruler of Mithila, O heroic king of Ayodhya, is eager to see you along with your preceptor and family priest.”

Hearing the submission of Sudāmana, the chief of the counsellors of Janaka, the king Daśaratha, accompanied by a multitude of sages as well as by his relations, called where Janaka was. Taking his seat along with his counsellors, preceptors and relations, Daśaratha, the foremost of those who know how to speak, spoke to Janaka, who belonged to the line of the Videhas, as follows: "It may be known to you, O great

king, that the very powerful sage Vasiṣtha, the adored of the house of Ikswāku, is our spokesman in all matters. Seated by the side of all great seers, the aforesaid Vasiṣtha, whose mind is given to piety, will with the approval of Viśwāmitra recount my pedigree in order of sequence." When Dāsaratha became silent, the very powerful and omniscient Vasiṣtha, who knows how to speak, spoke to Janaka, the ornament of the Videhas, and his family priest as follows: "Born of the Unmanifest Prakṛti, Brahma, the creator of the universe, is immortal, eternal (in the sense that he lives to an age of two Parārdhas or 31,10,40,00,00,00,000 human years) and free from decay. (9-19)

तस्मामरीचि: संज्ञे मरीचे: कश्यप: सुतः ।

विवस्वान् कश्यपाज्ञे मनुवैवस्तः स्मुतः ॥ 20  ॥

"To him was born Sage Marici, Marici's son was Sage Kaśyapa. Vivaswān (the sun-god) was born to Kaśyapa. Vivaswān's son was known as Manu. (20)

मनु: प्रजापति: पूर्वमिष्याकुश मनो: सुतः ।

तमिश्वाकुमयोध्यायां राजानं विविड् पूर्वकम् ॥ 21  ॥

"Manu was a Prajāpati, a lord of created beings, in the past and Ikswāku was the son of Manu. Know the aforesaid Ikswāku to have been the very first ruler of Ayodhyā. (21)

इश्वाकोस्तु सुतः श्रीमान् कृश्रितरिवेव विश्रुतः ।

कुक्षेरथासनः श्रीमान् विकृश्रिक्तदपघत ॥ 22  ॥

“Nay, Ikswāku’s glorious son was widely known by the name of Kuksī and the illustrious Vikukṣi was born as a son to Kuksī. (22)

विकुक्षेस्तु महातेजा बाण: पुरः प्रतापवान्।

बाणस्य तु महातेजा अनरप्यः प्रतापवान् ॥ 23  ॥

"The highly glorious and mighty Bāṇa, again, was the son of Vikuksī, and even so Anaranya was the highly glorious and mighty son of Bāṇa. (23)



अनरण्यात् पृथुर्ज़े सिश्रड्कुस्तु पृथोरि।

सिश्रज़ैरभवत् पुत्रो ध्युभूमारो महायशा: ॥ 24  ॥

"From the lions of Anaranya sprang up Prthu and from Prthu was born Triśańku. The highly illustrious Dhundhumāra was the son of Triśańku. (24)

ध्रुभुमारामहातेजा युवनाश्वो महारथः।

युवनाश्वसूनुशासीमान्याता पृथिवीपति: ॥ 25  ॥

"From Dhundhumāra sprang up the highly glorious Yuvaṇasāwa, a great car-warrior, and King Mandhāta was the son of Yuvaṇasāwa. (25)

मान्यात्तु सुतः श्रीमान् सुसन्धिश्रदपद्धात्।

सुसन्धीपि पुरौ हों ध्रुवसधि: प्रसेनक्ति।। 26  ॥।

"The glorious Susandhi, again, was born as a son to Mándhāta, while Dhruvasandhi and Prasenjit were the two sons of Susandhi. (26)

यशस्वी ध्रुवसन्धोस्तु भरतो नाम नामतः। भरतात् तु महातेजा असितो नाम जायत॥ 27  ॥

यस्यैते प्रतिराजान उदयघत्न शजव:।

हैहयास्तालजझृश शूराश शशविन्द:॥ 28  ॥

"The illustrious son of Dhruvasandhi, again, as is well known, was Bharata by name; and from Bharata sprang up a highly glorious son, Asita by name, against whom the Haihayas, the Talajanghas and the valiant Śaśabindus—these rival princes stood as enemies. (27-28)

तांश स प्रतियुध्यन् वै युद्धे राजा प्रवासितः ।

हिमवन्तमुपागम्य भार्थायां सहितस्तदा ॥ 29  ॥

असितो उपवल्लो राजा कालधर्ममुपर्यिव्यान् ।

दे चाय्य भार्ये गर्भिणयो बभूवतुरिति श्रुति: ॥ 30  ॥

"While confronting them in battle, of course, the said king was routed and banished from his kingdom by the enemy, who usurped his throne. Retiring to the Himalayas alongwith his two consorts then, King Asita, who had a small force left with him met his death, a necessary adjunct of Time. His two wives, of course, happened

to be enceinte at that time: so it is heard.

(29-30)

एका गर्भविनाशार्थ सपल्ये सगर ददौ।

ततः शैलवरे रथे बभूवार्भितो मुनिनः ॥ 31  ॥

भार्यावश्चवनो नाम हिमवन्तमुपाश्रितः ।

तत्र चैका महाभागा भार्गवं देववर्चेसम् ॥ 32  ॥

ववन्दे पदापत्राक्षी कांक्षन्ती सुतमुत्तमम् ।

तमृषिं साध्युपागम्य कालिन्दी चाध्यवादवत् ॥ 33  ॥

"One of them gave food mixed with poison to her co-wife in order to get rid of her foetus. At that time an ascetic, Cyavana by name, a descendant of Sage Bhrgu, who had taken up his abode on the Himalayas, got enamoured of that delightful and excellent peak and made his appearance there. Desirous of bearing an excellent son, one of those two widows, the highly blessed Kálindi, who had been given poison with food by her co-wife and who had eyes big as the petals of a lotus, saluted Cyavana, a scion of Bhrgu, who possessed the splendour of god. Nay, approaching the aforesaid seer, she greeted him once more.

(31-33)

स तामथवद्द विषः पुत्रेम् पुत्रजनम् ।

तव कुक्षी महाभागे सुपुत्रः सुमहाबलः ॥ 34  ॥ महावीयों महातेजा अचित्रात् संजनिष्यति ।

गरेण सहितः श्रीमान् मा शुचः कमलेक्षणे ॥ 35  ॥

As regards the birth of a son to her the aforesaid Brāhmaṇa said to her, eager as she was to have a healthy son, “From your womb, O highly fortunate lady, will be born with poison not long afterwards a noble and charming son possessing unique strength, exceedingly powerful and highly glorious. Do not grieve, O lotus-eyed lady!” (34-35)

च्ववनं च नमकूल्य राजपुरी पतित्रता।

पत्या विरहिता तस्मात् पुरं देवी व्यजायत ॥ 36  ॥

Having saluted Cyavana, the widowed princess, who was solely devoted to her husband, returned to her cottage and through



the grace of the sage the glorious lady safely delivered a son. (36)

सपल्या तु गरस्तये दत्तो गर्भजिचांसया।

सह तेन गरेणीव संजात: सगरो3भवत्॥ 37 ॥

"Poison was administered to her by her co-wife, it will be remembered, with the intention of killing the foetus. The boy was named Sagara inasmuch as he was born alongwith that very poison (नेश मह). (37)

सगरस्यासमुझस्तु असमझादथोंशुमान्।

दिलीपोंउगुमतः पुत्रो दिलीपस्य भगीर्थः॥ 38  ॥

“Sagara’s son was Asamañja and from Asamañja, again, sprang up Amśumān. Dilipa was the son of Amśumān. Dilipa’s son was Bhagiratha. (38)

भगीरथात् ककुलथश्र ककुलथाच्च रयुस्तथा।

रोयोस्तु पूत्रसंजस्यी प्रवृद्धः पुरुषघदकः ॥ 31  ॥

कल्याघपादोउपधवत् तस्माज्ञातस्तु श्रढ़ुणः ।

सुदर्शनः श्रढ़ुणस्य अग्रियर्षः सुदर्शनात् । 40  ॥

"From Bhagiratha sprang up Kakutstha and from Kakutstha likewise sprang up Raghu; while Raghu's son was the glorious Pravrddha, who later on turned out to be an ogre under the curse of his preceptor, Vasiṣṭha, and also became known as Kalmāṣapāda (because of his speckled feet).¹ Again, from the latter sprang up Saṅkhana. Sudarśana was the son of Saṅkhana; from Sudarśana sprang up Agnivarna. (39-40)

शीप्रगस्त्विग्रवर्णस्य शीप्रगस्य मकः सुतः।

मरो: प्रशुष्कस्त्वासीद्वसीष: प्रशुष्कात्॥ 41  ॥

“Sighraga was the son of Agnivarna and Sighraga’s son was Maru. Maru’s son was Praśuśruka, while from Praśuśruka sprang up Ambarisāa. (41)

अवसीषस्य पुत्रोsप्रदुषधु महीपति:।

नहुषस्य ययातिस्तु नाभागस्तु ययातिज: ॥ 42  ॥

Ambarisa's son, again, was King Nahuṣa\( ^{2} \) and Nahuṣa's son was Yayāti; while Nābhāga was the son of Yayāti. (42)

नाभागस्य बभूवाज अजाद् दूराधोरभवत्।

अस्माद् दूराधाज्ञातौ भातरी रामलक्ष्मणों ॥ 43  ॥

“Nābhaṇa’s son was Aja, from Aja sprang up Daśaratha. To this Daśaratha \( ^{3} \) (present before you) were born the two brothers, Śri Rāma and Laksāmana, alongwith their two other brothers, Bharata and Śatrughna. (43)

आदिवर्शिविशूढ़ानां राजां परमधर्मिणाम्।

इश्वाकुकुलनातानां वीराणां सत्यवादिताम् ॥ 44  ॥

रामलक्ष्मणयोर्षे त्वस्तुते वरये नृप।

सदुर्शाध्यां नरभ्रेष्ठ सदुर्शे दातुमहिंस ॥ 45  ॥

"On behalf of King Dásaáratha, as his family priest, I sue for your two daughters, O protector of men, for the sake of Śri Rāma and Lakṣmana, belonging as they do to the line of exceedingly pious, valiant and truthful monarchs born in the race of Ikswāku and absolutely pure of descent from the very beginning. Be pleased, O jewel among men, to give away your worthy daughters to the two equally worthy princes." (44-45)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्यांकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारण्डे सातितम: सर्ग: ॥ 70  ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

1. We read elsewhere how Pravrddha, when turned into an ogre by the curse of Vasistha, took water in the palm of his hand in readiness to pronounce a counter-curse on his preceptor, but deterred by his wife, he threw the water on one of his feet, which got speckled that very moment.

2. King Nahusa and Yayāti mentioned here are different from the kings of the same name belonging to the lunar dynasty and figuring in the Mahābhārata and elsewhere.

3. The order in which the names occur here is different from that followed in some of the Purānas. The difference can, however, be reconciled by the fact that the accounts relate to different Kalpas or cycles.

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

एकसमतिम: सर्ग:

Canto LXXI

Recounting his own pedigree, Janaka offers the hand of his two daughters, Sitā and Urmilā, to Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, respectively

एवं बुवाणं जनकः प्रत्युवाच कृताङ्जिलः।

श्रितामूर्हसि भई ते कुलं नः परिकीर्तितम्.। 1  ॥

प्रदाने हि मुनिश्रेष्ठ कुलं निरवशेषतः ।

वक्त्यं कुलजातेन तत्रिषोध महामते ॥ 2  ॥

To Vasiṣṭha, who was speaking as aforesaid, Janaka with folded hands replied as follows: “Be pleased to hear our genealogy, which is going to be recounted by us. May God bless you.” On the eve of giving away one’s daughter to a bridegroom, O jewel among sages, one’s pedigree needs must be exhaustively recited by one coming of a respectable family. Therefore, hear my pedigree as is being narrated by us, O Brāhmaṇa of great wisdom! (1-2)

राजाभूत त्रिषु लोकेषु विश्रुतः स्वेन कर्मणा।

निमि: परमधर्मात्मा सर्वसत्त्ववतां वर: ॥ 3  ॥

"There was a most pious-minded king, Nimi by name, who was the foremost of all powerful men and celebrated in all the three worlds for his deeds. (3)

तस्य पुत्रे मिथिनांम जनको मिथियपुत्रकः ।

प्रथमो जनको राजा जनकाद्युदावसु: ॥ 4  ॥

“His son was Mithi by name; Mithi’s son was Janaka, the first ruler bearing the title of Janaka. From Janaka, again, sprang up Udāvasu. (4)

उद्रावसोसु धर्माता जातो वै न्तिवधानः ।

निद्वधसूतः शूरः सुकेतुर्गम नामतः ॥ ५. ॥

"From Udāvasu indeed sprang up Nandivardhana, whose mind was really given to piety. Nandivardhana's gallant son, as is well known, was Suketu by name. (5)

सुकेतोरपि धर्मात्मा देवरातो महाबल:।

देवरातस्य राजर्षेबृहस्य इति स्मृतः ॥ 6  ॥

"From Suketu, again, sprang up the pious-minded and very mighty Devarāta; the son of the royal sage Devarāta was known as Brhadrathā. (6)

ब्रहृद्रध्यस्य शूरोर्भमृहबीर: प्रतापवान्।

महावीरस्य ध्रुतिमान् सुधृति: सत्यविक्रमः ॥ 9  ॥

"The gallant and glorious Mahávira was the son of Brhadrathā. Mahávira's steadfast and truly valiant son was Sudhṛti. (7)

सुधृतेरपि धर्मात्मा धृष्टकेतु: सुधार्थमिकः।

धृष्टकेतोश्र राजर्षेह्रंश्रव इति विश्रुतः ॥ 8  ॥

"Sudhrī's son, again, was the highly pious Dhrṣṭaketu, whose mind was given to righteousness; and the son of the royal sage Dhrṣṭaketu was widely known by the name of Haryaśwa. (8)

इर्शप्रस्य मकः पुत्रो मरोः पुत्रः प्रतिभ्राकः।

प्रतिभ्राकस्य धर्मात्मा राजा कंतिरिधः सुतः ॥ 9  ॥

"Haryaśwa's son was Maru, Maru's son was Pratindhaka and Pratindhaka's pious-minded son was King Kirtiratha. (9)

पुत्र: कंतिरिश्यापि देवमीढ़ इति स्मृतः ।

देवमीढ़स्य विवुधो विवुधस्य महीधकः ॥ 10  ॥

“Kirtiratha’s son, again, was known as Devamidha. Devamidha’s son was Vibudha and Vibudha’s Mahidhraka. (10)

महीधकस्तु तरा कांतिराते महाबल: ।

कांतिरातस्य तराबेमैहारोमा व्यजायत ॥ 11  ॥

“Mahidhraka’s son was very mighty King Kirtirāta. Mahāromā was born as the son of the royal sage Kirtirāta. (11)

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

महारोम्पान्तु धर्मात्मा स्वर्णरोमा व्यजायत।

स्वर्णरोम्पान्तु राजर्षैछ्वरोमा व्यजायत॥ 12 ॥

"From Mahāromā indeed sprang up the pious-minded Swarnaromā and from the royal sage Swarnāromā sprang up Hraswaromā. (12)

तन्य पुत्रद्यं राजो धर्मजस्य महात्मन:।

ज्येष्ठोउहमनुजो भाता मम वीर: कुशणक्षतः ॥ 13  ॥

"A couple of sons were born to that high-souled king, who knew what is right, myself being the elder and my valiant brother, Kuśadhwaja, the younger. (13)

मां तु ज्येष्ठं पिता राज्ये सोर्पिधिच्य नराधिःः।

कुशणक्षत्रं समावेश्य भारं मयि वनं गतः ॥ 14  ॥

"Installing me, the elder one, on the throne and entrusting Kuśadhwaja to me as my charge, the king (my father) retired to the forest. (14)

ब्रुद्धे पितरि स्वयंते धर्मेण धुरमावहम्।

भातरं देवसंकाशं सेहात् पश्यन् कुशध्यबम् ॥ 15  ॥

"My aged father having ascended to heaven, I bore the burden of kingship put by him on my shoulders in conformity with the principles of righteousness, looking after with affection my brother Kuśadhwaja, who shines like a god. (15)

कस्यचित्तव्य कालस्य संकाश्यादागतः पुरात्।

सुधन्ता वीर्यवान् राजा मिथिलामवरीधक: ॥ 16  ॥

"Some time later the powerful King Sudhanvā came all the way from the town of Śankāśya and besieged Mithilā. (16)

स च मे प्रेयमायास शैवं धनुर्नुत्तमम्।

सीता च कन्या पदाखी महां वे दीयतामिति ॥ 17  ॥

"He sent word to me saying, 'The superb bow belonging to Lord Śiva as well as your lotus-eyed daughter, Sitā, may kindly be given away to me.' (17)

त्याग्यदानामहर्षे युद्धमासीन्मया सह।

स हतोर्भिमुखो राजा सुधवा तु मया रणे ॥ 18  ॥

"On my refusal, O great seer, he fought with me, with the result that fighting face to face with me on the battlefield, the aforesaid King Sudhanvà was eventually killed by me. (18)

निह्ल्य तं मुनिश्रेष्ठ सुधवानं नराधियम्।

सांकार्ये भातरं शूरमध्यपिझं कुशध्यजम् ॥ 19  ॥

"Having got rid of the said King Sudhanvà, O jewel among sages, I enthroned my valiant brother, Kuśadhwaja, at Śankāśya. (19)

कनीयानेच मे भाता अहं ज्येष्ठो महामुने।

ददामि परमप्रीते वक्षो ते मुनिपुंगव ॥ 20  ॥

सीतां रामाय भई ते ऊर्मिलां लक्ष्मणाय चै।

वीर्यैशुल्कां मम सुतां सीतां सुरसुतोपमामू॥ 21  ॥

द्वितीयामूमिलां चैव विवेदामि न संशयः ।

ददामि परमप्रीते वक्षो ते मुनिपुंगव ॥ 22  ॥

"This younger brother of mine as well as I, the elder, most delightfully offer to you my two daughters as your daughters-in-law, Sitā for Śri Rāma and Urmilā for Lakṣmana, O eminent sage ! May prosperity attend on you, O jewel among sages ! I repeat thrice: full of supreme delight I offer as your daughters-in-law my daughter, Sitā, who resembles a daughter of the gods and has been won by Śri Rāma through personal valour, as also Urmilā, my second daughter. There is no doubt about it, O jewel among sages ! (20-22)

ग्रामलक्ष्मणयो राजन गोदानं कारयस्व ह।

चितृकार्य च भई ने ततो वैवाहिकं कुर्भ १३३ ॥

“(Turning to Daśaratha) please get (the formality of) Samavartana (the ceremony of returning to one’s own parents’ home after completing one’s studies at the residence of one’s teacher, marked with the shaving* of one’s hair on the head as well as on the arm-pits) gone through by Śri Rama and Lakṣmana with delight, and then perform the Nandisráddha, a ceremony intended to propitiate one’s departed ancestors,

* The word ‘गोदान’ in Sanskrit also means the shaving of one’s hair.



preliminary to matrimony. May good betide you, O king! (23)

मया हृद्य महाबाहो तृतीयदिवसे प्रभो।

फल्प्यामुनेरे राजस्तस्मन् वैवाहिकं कुंर।

रामलक्ष्मणयोरधैं दानं कार्यं सुखोदयम् ॥ 24  ॥

Indeed, the constellation Maghâ is in

the ascendant today, O mighty-armed king! On the third day, when the celebrated Uttarâ Phâlguni mansion is in the ascendant, my lord, perform the wedding ceremony. Gifts, which are calculated to bring happiness in its wake, should be made for the welfare of Śri Râma and Lakṣmana. (24)

इत्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे एकससर्तितम: सर्प: ॥ 01  ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-one in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

द्विसस्तितमः सर्गः

Canto LXXII

Vasisṭha and Viśwāmitra jointly ask for the hand of the two daughters of Kuśadhwaja in favour of Bharata and Śatrughna and Janaka acquiesces in the proposal. Thereupon Dāśaratha gets his sons to perform the rite of Samāvartana and himself performs the Nāndiśrāddha

तमुक्तवन्ते वैदेहं विश्वामित्रो महामुपिन: ।

उवाच वचनं वीरं वसिष्ठसहितो नृपम् ॥ 1  ॥

To the celebrated and heroic King Janaka (belonging to the Videha dynasty), who had finished his say, the great sage Viswāmitra, accompanied by Vasistha, addressed the following words: (1)

अश्चन्यान्यप्रमेयाणि कुलानि नरपुंगव।

इक्ष्वाकृष्णा विद्वहानां नैषां तुल्योप्रति कक्षान ॥ 2  ॥

"The royal houses of Ikswāku and Videha are inconceivably great and immeasurably glorious, O jewel among men! There is none equal to those belonging to these two races. (2)

सदृगो धर्मेमव्यः सदृगो रूपसम्पदा ।

रामलक्ष्मयो राजन् सीता चोमिलया सह ॥ 3  ॥

The sacred matrimonial alliance, going to be contracted between the two houses, is well-matched; it is well-matched in point of physical charm as well as of riches; for Sita alongwith Ürmilā is quite becoming

of Śri Rāma and Lakṣmana. (3)

वक्तक्यं च नरश्रेष्ठ श्रयतां वचनं मम ।

भाता यवीयान् धर्मेर एष राजा कुशध्वज: ॥ 4  ॥

There is more to be said on this subject, O jewel among men! Let my counsel be heard. Here is your younger brother, King Kuśadhwaja, who knows what is right.

(4)

अस्य धार्मितमो राजन् रूपेणाप्रतिमं भूवि ।

सुताद्यं नरश्रेष्ठ पत्यर्थं वरयामहै ॥ 5  ॥

भरतस्य कुमारस्य शनुप्रस्य च धीमतः ।

बरये ते सुते राजसंत्योरघे महात्मनो: ॥ 6  ॥

We sue, O jewel among men, as a wife to prince Bharata as also to the shrewd Satrughna, the two others sons of Emperor Dasaratha, the two daughters, of this pious-minded prince, who are peerless on earth in point of comeliness. O king, whereas I ask your two daughters, Sītā and Urmilā, for these two high-souled princes, Śri Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, O Janaka! (5-6)



पूत्र दूरगर्धस्ये रूपयोवनशालिन:।

लोकपालसमा: सर्वे देवतुल्यपराक्रमा: ॥ 9  ॥

"All these four sons of Daśaratha are full of charm as well as of youth, nay equal in prowess to gods, and the very compeers of the guardians of the spheres. (7)

उभ्योरिप राजेन्द्र सम्बन्धोनानुबध्यताम्।

इर्थाकुकुलमत्ययं भवतः पुण्यकर्मण: ॥ 8  ॥

“Through the marriage of both these pairs let the house of Ikswāku be bound with ties of love, O ruler of rulers; and let your mind remain unperturbed by a feeling of diffidence in contracting a fourfold relation with the great King Daśaratha all at once, a man of virtuous deeds as you are.” (8)

विश्वार्मिवरच: श्रुत्वा विसछस्य मते तदा।

जनकः प्राझ्लिलविक्यमुवाच मुपिनुपोजी ॥ 9  ॥

Hearing the proposal of Viśwāmitra, agreeing with the view of Vasiṣṭha, Janaka forthwith submitted to both the jewels among sages with folded hands as follows: (9)

कुलं धवमिदं मन्ये येषां तो मुपिनुपांजी

सदूर्ग कुलसम्बन्धं यदाजापयत: स्वयम् ॥ 10  ॥

"I consider my pedigree blessed in that you two shining jewels among sages personally enjoy us to contract a matrimonial alliance worthy of us. (10)

एवं भवतु भई वः कुशध्वजसुते इमे।

पल्पो भजेतां सहिती शत्रुघभरतावुभी ॥ 11  ॥

"Let it be so! May good fortune attend on you all! Let Sātrughna and Bharata both, who ever remain together, take to wife the said two daughters of Kuśadhwaja. (11)

एकाह्रा राजपुत्रीणां चतसूणां महामुने।

पाणिन् गृह्नु चत्वारो राजपुत्रा महाबलना: ॥ 12  ॥

"Let all the four very mighty princes marry the four princesses the same day, O eminent sage ! (12)

उत्तर दिवसे ब्रह्न फल्गनीथ्यां मनीधिणः।

वैवाहिक प्रशंसित भगो यत्र प्रजापति: ॥ 13  ॥

"The wise commend a wedding on the second of the following two days marked by the ascenedency of the two lunar mansions bearing the name of Phálguni, viz., the Pūrvā Phālguni and the Uttarā Phālguni, presided over by Prajāpati, the god presiding over the genitals." (13)

एवमुक्त्वा वचः सौम्यं प्रत्युस्थाय कृताझलि:।

उभौ मुनिवर्गे राजा जनको वाक्यमवजीत् ॥ 14  ॥

Having made the aforesaid gentle request and rising from his seat as a mark of respect, King Janaka submitted with folded hands to both the great sages as follows: (14)

परो धर्मः कृते महां शिष्योप्रिम भवतोस्तथा ।

इमान्यासनमुख्याति आस्यतां मुपिनुपावी ॥ 15  ॥

"A supreme merit has been conferred upon me by you in the form of virtue resulting from the contemplated gift of my daughters to worthy recipients. I am servant to you both in the same way as is Daśaratha; let you both be seated on exalted seats, O jewels among sages! (15)

यथा दूराश्यस्यें तथायोध्या पुरी मम।

प्रभुत्वे नास्ति संदेहो यथाईं कतुर्महेश् ॥ 16  ॥

"Just as this city of Mithilā belongs to Daśaratha, so is Ayodhyā my own city. There can be no doubt about your authority here. Be pleased, therefore, to do what is in the fitness of things." (16)

तथा ब्रवति वैदेहे जनके रघुनन्दन: ।

राजा द्वगशे हृदः प्रत्युवाच महीपतिम् ॥ 17  ॥

While Janaka, who belonged to the line of the Videhas, was speaking thus, King Dasaratha, a scion of Raghu, joyously replied to the aforesaid king as follows: (17)

युवामसंख्यिपुणो भातरी मिधिलेशप्रसौ ।

त्रिषयो राजसुज्ञु भवद्ध्यामिभपूर्जितः ॥ 18  ॥

"You two brothers, the rulers of Mithilā, possess innumerable qualities. Sages and hosts of princes have been entertained by you both on many occasions." (18)



स्वस्ति प्राप्नुहि भयं ते गमिष्याम: स्वामालयम्।

श्राद्रकर्माणि विधिविद्धाशय इति चाब्बतीम् ॥ 11  ॥

"Attain happiness. May God bless you! We shall now retire to our own lodging and shall duly perform the Śraddha rites," he added. (19)

तमापुर्वता नरपति राजा दशराथस्तदा।

मुनीजी तौ पुरस्कृल जगामागृ मह्यशना: ॥ 20  ॥

Taking leave of the celebrated Janaka,

a ruler of men, at that moment, the highly illustrious King Dáśaratha soon departed, placing the aforesaid two great sages, Vasiṣtha and Viśwāmitra, ahead. (20)

स गत्वा निलयं राजा शाढ़ं कृत्वा विधानतः ।

प्रभाते काल्यमुत्थाय चक्रे गोदानमुतमम् ॥ 21  ॥

Reaching his lodging and performing the Śrāddha with due ceremony, the king rose in the morning and performed the grand Samāvatrana ceremony (with respect to his four sons, consisting in the shaving of their hair on the head and the armpits and the gifting of cows), appropriate to that time.(21)

गर्वा शतसहचं च ब्राह्मणेध्ये नराधिध:।

एकैकशो ददौ राजा पुत्रानुद्धिश्य धर्मत: ॥ 22  ॥

King Dáśaratha, who loved his sons

very much, gave away in accordance with the principles of righteousness a hundred thousand cows to the Brāhmanas for the sake of each of his four sons. (22)

सुवर्णश्रृत्रा: सम्यज्ञा: सवसला: कांस्यदोहना:।

गवां शतसहस्वाणि चत्वारि पुरुषर्षभः ॥ 23  ॥

वितमन्यच्छ सुबहु द्विजेथो सुनन्दनः ।

ददौ गोदानमुद्धिप्य पूजाणां पुत्रवस्ततः ॥ 24  ॥

In the name of the Samāvartana ceremony with respect to his four sons, Emperor Daśaratha, a scion of Raghu, the foremost of men, who was so fond of his sons, bestowed (on that occasion) on the Brahmanas four lakhs of recently calved cows that had their horns plated with gold and yielded ample milk, each with a milking vessel of bell-metal, as well as abundant riches of other description. (23-24)

स सुतेः कृतगोदानैषुतः सचुपतिस्तदा ।

लोकपालैरिवाभाति वृत: सौम्य: प्रजापति: ॥ 25  ॥

Surrounded on that occasion by his sons, who had their heads shaved and had gifted so many cows, the king shone brightly like the delightful Brahmā, the lord of created beings, surrounded by the guardians of the spheres. (25)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे

दिवसतितमः सर्ग: ॥ 92  ॥

Thus ends of Canto Seventy-two in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyana of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.

* VÁLMÍKI-RÁMÂYANA *

त्रिसमितिम: सर्गै:

Canto LXXIII

Janaka escorts Daśaratha and his four sons clad in nuptial attire to the pavilion erected for the wedding. Placing Viśwāmitra and Śatānanda ahead, Vasiṣṭha conducts the marriage ceremony. Śri Rāma and his three brothers clasp the hand of Sītā and her sisters. Singing and dancing for joy, the gods rain heavenly flowers on the brides and bridegrooms

यस्मितु दिवसे राजा चके गोदानमुतमम्।

तस्मितु दिवसे वीरो युधाजितु समुप्रियवान्।। 1 ।।

पुत्र: केकयराजस्य साक्षाद्रतमातुल:।

दृष्ट्वा पृष्ट्वा च कुशलं राजानमिदमब्रवीत्।। 2 ।।

On that very day when in fact Emperor Daśaratha performed the grand Samāvatrana ceremony, the valiant Yudhājit, the son of the ruler of the Kekeya kingdom and Bharata's own maternal uncle, duly arrived at Mithilā. Seeing the Emperor and inquiring after his welfare, he submitted to him as follows: (1-2)

केकयाधिपती राजा सेहात् कुशलमब्रवीत्।

येपां कुशलकामोउस तेषां सम्प्रत्यनामयम् ॥ 3  ॥

"My father, the sovereign ruler of the Kekeya territory, has out of affection inquired after your welfare and added that all is well at present with those whose well-being you desire. (3)

स्वसीयं मम राजेन्द्र उर्दुकामो महीपति: । तदर्थमुपयातोउहसयोध्यां रघुनन्दन ॥ 4  ॥

"The king, my father, is eager to see Bharata, my sister's son, O king of kings! For this purpose I went straight to Ayodhya, O scion of Raghu! (4)

श्रुता त्वहमयोध्यायां विवाहार्थ तवात्मजान्। मिथिलापूययातांस्तु त्वया सह महीपते ॥ 5  ॥ त्वरायाभ्युपयातोई रुद्धकाम: स्वसु: सुतम्। अथ राजा दर्शगर्ध: प्रियातिथिपुगस्थितम् ॥ 6  ॥ दूर्ध्वा परमसलकरै: पूजनाहीम्पुजवत्। ततस्तामुपिति रात्रि सह पुरैमंहात्मभि: ॥ 7  ॥

प्रभाते पुनरूस्थाय कृता कर्माणि तत्ववित्।

क्रश्मीस्तदा पुरस्कृतः युस्वाटमुपागमत् ॥ 8  ॥

"When, however, O king, I heard at Ayodhyā of your sons, Bharata and Sátrughna, having proceeded with you direct to Mithilā for the wedding of Śrī Rāma, I drove in haste to this place, eager to see my sister's son." Seeing his beloved guest Yudhājit, deserving of all honour, arrived in his presence, King Dásarathā forthwith entertained him with utmost attentions. Then, having spent that night with his high-souled sons, he got up again in the morning; and, having finished his duties for the morning, the king (who had realized the truth) forthwith reached the pavilion erected for the wedding, placing the sages at the head. (5-8)

युक्ते मुहुते विजने सर्वांभरणभूषिते:।

भातृभिः सहितो रामः कृतकौतुकममुक्ते: १ १ १

वसिध्डं पुरतः कृत्वा महर्षीपरानपि।

वसिध्डो भगवानेत्य वैदेह्रामिदमब्रबीत् १ १ ० १

Placing ahead sage Vasiṣtha and other eminent sages too, and accompanied by all his three brothers, adorned with every ornament, Śri Rāma, who was himself dressed in a festive attire appropriate to the occasion of wedding, also arrived at the hour known (in astronomical works) by the name of Vijaya (so-called because it is calculated to bring success to an enterprise undertaken during that hour), propitious for a wedding. Arriving there, the holy Vasiṣtha spoke to

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

Janaka (born in the line of the Videhas) as follows : (9-10)

राजा दर्शाथो राजन् कृतकांतुकमङ्गलै:।

पुत्रैनरवश्रेष्ठो दातातरमिभाकाङ्गलेमे ॥ 11  ॥

दातप्रसिग्रहीतृभ्यां सर्वाशि: सम्भवन्ति हि।

स्वधर्म प्रतिपश्यल कृत्ता वैवाह्यमुत्नमम् ॥ 12  ॥

"Alongwith his sons, dressed in festive attires, appropriate to the occasion of wedding, O king, Emperor Daśaratha, a jewel among the foremost of men, awaits the pleasure of the donor; for all gifts take place only with the co-operation of the donor and the donee. Therefore, performing the noble rites pertaining to the wedding, discharge your sacred obligation (of redeeming the word given by you to king Daśaratha)." (11-12)

इत्पुकः परमोदारो वसिष्ठेन महात्मना।

प्रत्युवाच महातेजा वाक्यं परमधर्मवित्त। 113  ॥

Requested thus by the high-souled Vasistha, the highly glorious Janaka, who was extremely noble and possessed the highest knowledge of what is right, replied as follows: (13)

क: स्थितः प्रतिहारो मे कस्याजां सम्पतीक्षेते।

स्यगुहे को विचारोसस्ति यथा राज्यमिदं तत ॥ 14  ॥

"Who stands at the door to guard my entrance and whose permission does the Emperor keenly await? What scruple should there be in entering one's own house? This kingdom is as much yours as mine. (14)

कृतकौतुकसंवेला वैदिमूलमुपागता:।

मम कन्या मुनिश्रेष्ठ दौरा बह्वैराविषय: ॥ 15  ॥

"Having gone through all auspicious rites connected with the wedding, my daughters, O jewel among sages, have already arrived at the foot of the sacrificial altar, looking like so many blazing flames of fire. (15)

सद्योड़ं लवत्रतीक्षो3स्मि वेढामयसां प्रतिधितः ।

अविर्धं क्रियतां सर्वे किमर्थे हि विलम्ब्यते ॥ 16  ॥

"Firmly seated on this altar, I am just waiting for you. Hence let everything

connected with the wedding be performed without any let or hindrance. What for is the ceremony actually being delayed?" (16)

तद् वाक्यं जनकेनोक्तं श्रुत्वा दशरथस्तदा।

प्रवेशयामास सुतान् सर्वान्हिणणानपि ॥ 17  ॥

Hearing the aforesaid reply given by Janaka, Dáasaratha forthwith took his sons as also all the hosts of sages into the pavilion erected for the wedding. (17)

ततो राजा विदेहानां विसिटमिदमबवीत्।

कारयस ऋषे सर्वांमर्धिभः सह धार्मिक ॥ 18  ॥

रामस्य लोकारमस्य क्रियां वैवाहिकों प्रभो ।

तथेत्युक्ता तु जनक वसिधो भगवानृभि: ॥ 19  ॥

विश्वामित्रं पुरस्कृत्य शतानन्दं च धार्मिकम् ।

प्रपामध्ये तु विधिवद् वैदिं कृता महातपा: ॥ 20  ॥

अलंचकार तां वैदिं गवधुप्ये: समन्ततः ।

सूवर्णपीलकाधिश्र छ विद्यकुभेक्षा साङ्कुरैः ॥ 19  ॥

अड्कुराढ्योः शरावैश्छ ध्यप्यातैः सध्यपेः ।

शबुङपातैः सुवैः सूरिभः पात्रेच्यादिपूर्विते: ॥ 22  ॥

लाजपूर्णैश प्यातीभरक्षतेरिप संस्कृतेः ।

दर्षे: समै: समास्तीर्व विधिवमन्यपूर्वेकम् ॥ 23  ॥

अग्रिभाधाय ते वेधां विधिभन्यपुरस्कृतम् ।

जुहावागी महातेना वसिडो मुनिपुंगव: ॥ 24  ॥

Thereupon Janaka, the ruler of the Videha kingdom, submitted as follows to Vasiṣṭha : “Alongwith the other sages, O pious seer, conduct the nuptial ceremony of Śri Rāma, the delight of the world, my lord !”

Saying “Amen!” to Janaka, and placing Viśwāmitra and the pious Śatānanda ahead, the holy sage Vasiṣṭha, who was a great ascetic, prepared a sacrificial altar at the centre of the pavilion according to the scriptural ordinance, and decorated the said altar on all sides with sandal-paste and flowers. He then provided it with plates of gold and jars of variegated colours containing sprouts as well as with shallow earthenware cups (also) full of sprouts, vessels for incense containing incense, conches serving the purpose of vessels, Sruks (large wooden ladles used for pouring ghee on a sacrificial fire and



properly made of Paláša or Khadira wood about as long as an arm, with a receptacle at the end of the size of a hand) and Sruvās (smaller wooden ladles used for pouring ghee into the Struk), vessels brimful with water to be offered to a deity for washing the hands etc., with, as well as with vessels full of parched grains of paddy and smaller vessels as also with grains of unbroken rice dyed with the powder of dried turmeric root. Again, bestrewing the altar with blades of Darbha grass equal in length and placing the fire on it according to the scriptural ordinance while reciting sacred texts, the highly glorious Vasiṣṭha, the foremost of sages, poured oblations into it with due ceremony with the recitation of sacred texts. (18-24)

ततः सीता समानीय सर्वभरणभूषितम्।

समध्यग्रि: संस्थाया राववाभिमुखे तत्या २५. ॥

अङवीजनको राजा कौसल्यानन्दवधेनम्।

इयं सीता मम सुता सहधर्मचरी तत् ॥ 26  ॥

Duly escorting after that Sitā, adorned with all sorts of jewels, and having comfortably seated her before the sacred fire opposite Śrī Rāma, the ornament of Raghu's race, King Janaka then spoke as follows to Śrī Rāma, the promoter of Kausalyā's joy: "This Sitā, my daughter, is going to be your helpmate in discharging your sacred obligations. (25-26)

प्रतीच्छ चैनां भर्ते ते पात्रिं गृह्मीच पात्रिना।

पतित्वात महाभागा छायेवानुगता सदा ॥ 27  ॥

"Take her hand in your own and accept her as your own. May good betide you! She is highly fortunate and will remain exclusively devoted to you (her husband) and will ever follow you as a shadow." (27)

इत्यक्लवा प्राधिष्यद्र राजा मन्त्रुत जलं ततं।

साधुसाध्विति देवानागृधीगां वदतां तदा ॥ 28  ॥

देवदुद्धिपिनिर्योंप: पुर्यवर्षों महानभूत्।

एवं दंचा सुतां सीति मनोदकुपरस्कृताम् ॥ 29  ॥

अब्बीरजनको राजा हर्षेपाधिपरित्तुतः ।

लक्ष्मणागच्छ भई ते झमिलामुद्यातां मया ॥ 30  ॥

प्रतीच्छ पार्थिं गृह्लीच मा भूत कालस्य पर्यंः ।

तमेवमुक्त्या जनको भरतं चाध्यभापत ॥ 31  ॥

Saying so, king Janaka forthwith transferred to Śri Rāma's hand the water in his own hand, consecrated by the recitation of sacred texts, signifying his will to offer the hand of Sītā to Śri Rāma. At that time was heard the noise of celestial kettledrums and there fell an abundant shower of flowers rained by gods and sages exclaiming "Good ! Well done!" Having thus given away to Śri Rāma his daughter, Sītā, in the wake of water (held in his palm and) consecrated by the recitation of Mantras (giving expression to his vow of bestowing the princess on Śri Rāma), King Janaka, filled with rapture, said to Laksmana, "Laksmana, come along; may good betide you! Accept Urmilā, being given away by me. Take her hand in your own, let there be no loss of time." Having requested Laksmana thus, Janaka spoke to Bharata too as follows: (28-31)

ग्राहण पार्थि माणड्या: पाणिणा रघुनन्दन।

शत्रुघं चार्थि धर्मात्मा अज्बीविभिथलेशर: ॥ 32  ॥

श्रतकौतैर्मेहावाहो पार्थि गृह्ञीच पाणिणा।

सर्वे भवन्तः सौम्याश्रु सर्वे सुचरितबाताः ॥ 33  ॥

"Clasp the hand of Mānḍavi with your own, O scion of Raghu!" The pious king of Mithilā further said to Sātrughna, "Take in your hand, O mighty-armed prince, the hand of Śrutakirti. You are all gentle and have all duly observed sacred vows of celibacy etc. (32-33)

पतौर्धिः सन्तु काकुत्स्या मा भूत कालस्य पर्यंः।

जनकस्य वचः श्रुत्वा पाणिभि पाणिभिरस्यूगन्। 34  ॥

चत्वारसे चतसूणां वसिष्ठस्य मते स्थिताः।

अंगिर्ध प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा वैदिं राजानमेव च। 35  ॥

त्रस्थींश्रापि महात्मानः सहभार्यां रघूद्रहाः।

यथोक्तेन ततश्रकुर्विवाहं विधिपुर्बेकम्। 36  ॥

"Let yourselves be married, O scions of Kakutstha ! Let there be no delay." Hearing the request of Janaka, all the four princes,

* BÁLAKÂNDA *

who followed the directions of Vasiṣṭha, grasped with their hands the hands of the four princesses. Going clockwise round the sacrificial fire, the altar as well as round Janaka and the sages too, the high-souled princes, the jewels among the Raghus, along with their brides thereupon went through the wedding ceremony in accordance with the correct procedure as laid down in our scriptures. (34-36)

पुष्पवृष्टिर्महत्यासीद्नतरिश्रशत् सुभास्वरा।

दिव्यदुर्दुपभिनिषोर्गीतावादिजनःस्वर्नै: 11 ३७ 11

Accompanied by the loud beating of celestial kettledrums and the melodious sound of vocal and instrumental music, an abundant and most splendid shower of blossoms fell from the heavens. (37)

ननुतुशापसःसुका ग्रन्थवांश जनुः कतनम्।

विवाहे रथमुख्यानां तद्ब्द्रतमदूश्यत ॥ 38  ॥

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे जिससतितम: सर्ग: ॥ 93  ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-three in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

चतुस्समितितम: सर्गी:

Canto LXXIV

Taking leave of Janaka and Dásaratha, Viśwāmitra returns to his own hermitage and, accepting large wedding presents, Dásaratha too turns back to Ayodhyā alongwith his sons and their newly-wedded brides. On the way the irascible and redoubtable Paraśurama, a sworn enemy of the Kṣatriyas, suddenly appears before them, axe in hand, and Vasiṣtha and the other sages accompanying the party offer worship to him

अथ रायां व्यतीतायां विश्वामिचो महामुभि: ।

आपृष्ट्वा तौ च राजानौ जगामोतपर्वतम् ॥ 1  ॥

Asking leave of both the kings, the night having passed, the eminent sage Viśwāmitra forthwith proceeded direct to the northern mountain, the Himalayas. (1)

विश्वामिचे गते राजा वैदेहं मिथिलाधिपम्।

आपृष्ट्वैव जगामाशु राजा द्वशस्थः पुरीम् ॥ 2  ॥

Asking permission of Janaka, who belonged to the line of the Videhas, the ruler of Mithilā, the moment Viśwāmitra had departed, the glorious King Dāśaratha too proceeded immediately to his capital. (2)



अथ राजा विदेहानां ददौ कन्याधनं बहु।

गवां शतसहस्वाणि बहूनि मिथिलेश्वर: ॥ 3  ॥

कम्बलानां च मुख्यानां क्षीमान् कोटयाम्वारिण च ।

हस्पश्वरथपदातं दिव्यरूपं स्वलंकृतम् ॥ 4  ॥

ददौ कन्याशतं तासां दासीदासमनुत्तमम् ।

हिरणयस्य सुवर्णस्य मुक्तानां विदुगस्य च ॥ 5  ॥

At that time the ruler of the Videha territory gave a rich dowry. As a part of that dowry, the king of Mithilā gave away many lakhs of cows and as many first-class carpets, numerous silken textiles and tens of millions of cotton pieces, elephants, horses, chariots and foot soldiers, a hundred richly-adorned maids endowed with supernal beauty as companions for his daughters, excellent servants and servant-maids and a lot of silver, gold, pearls and coral beads.

(3-5)

ददौ राजा सुसंहृदः कन्याधनमनुतमम्।

दरूचा बहुविधा राजा समनुजाय पार्थिवम् ६ १।

प्रविवेश स्वलिनयं मिथिलां मिथिलेग्रसरः ।

राजाप्ययोध्याधिपति: सह पुत्रैमहात्मभि: १ ७ १।

ऋर्षीने सर्वान् पुरस्कृत्य जगाम सवलानुगनः ।

गच्छन्ते तु नरत्याङ्गे सर्विसईं सरावयम् १ ८ १।

घोरास्तु पक्षिणो वाचो व्याहरन्ति समन्ततः ।

भौमाधीश्व मगा: सर्वे गच्छन्ति स्म प्रदक्षिणम् १ ९ १।

Extremely delighted, the king thus gave an excellent dowry. Having given manifold presents and duly taking leave of Daśaratha, the ruler of the earth, the king of Mithilā returned to Mithilā, his own capital. Placing ahead all the sages, that had accompanied him to Mithilā, and accompanied by his army and entourage, King Daśaratha (the ruler of Ayodhya) too departed with his high-souled sons for Ayodhya. While the tiger among men was journeying with the hosts of sages as well as with his four sons, the scions of Raghu, fearful birds began to cry all around him; while, on the other hand, the deer on the land, one and all, crossed his path from the left. (6-9)

तान् दुर्ट्वा राजशादूलो वसित्धं पर्यपृष्ठ्त।

असीम्या: पक्षिणो घोरा मृगाश्रापि प्रदक्षिणाः ॥ 10  ॥

Seeing them, Daśaratha, a tiger among kings, respectfully inquired of Vasiṣtha, saying, “Loathsome birds are screaming on the one hand, which is an ominous portent; and at the same time deer cross my way from the left, which is a good omen! (10)

किमिदं हृदयोकाम्प मनो मम विषीदिति ।

राजो दूरशस्येतच्छुला वाक्यं महानृपि: ॥ 11  ॥

उवाच मधुरां वाणी श्रयतामस्य यत् फलम् ।

उपास्वतं भयं घोरं दिव्यं पक्षिमुखाच्छ्युतम् ॥ 12  ॥

"What may this be, which makes my heart quiver? My mind is sorrowful." Hearing this question of King Dáśaratha, the great seer, Vasisṭha, replied in a sweet tone as follows: "Hear what it portends. The indication that comes from the screaming of birds in the air is that a grave danger is imminent. (11-12)

मृगा: प्रशमयन्त्रेे संतापस्वन्यतामयम्।

तेषां संवदातं तत्र वायु: प्रादुर्षभूव हं॥ 13 ॥

कमयन्त् मेदिन्ती सर्वा पातयंश महादूमान्।

तमसा संवृत: सूर्वे: सर्वे नावेदिषुदर्श: ॥ 14  ॥

"These deer, however, allay our fears. Therefore, let this anxiety be given up." While they were conversing thus on the road, a tempest set in, they say, shaking the entire globe and throwing down big trees. The sun got enveloped in darkness, all people failed to discern the directions.

(13-14)

भस्मना चावृतं सर्वं सम्मूदमिव तद्बलम्।

वसिति ऋषयश्रान्ये राजा च समुतस्तदा ॥ 15  ॥

ससंज्ञा इव ततासन् सर्वमन्याद्रिचेतनम्।

तस्मितमासि घोरे तु भस्मच्छेत्र वा चम्: ॥ 16  ॥

ददर्शी भीमसंकाशं जताभगडलधारिणम्।

भार्यं जामद्रप्रोयं राजा राजविमदर्नम् ॥ 17  ॥

कैलासमिव दुर्धर्षे कालाप्रिभिव दुःसहम्।

ज्वलनमिव तेजोभिदुर्निरीक्ष्य पृथगजरे: ॥ 18  ॥



रक्क्ये चासञ्य्प परगूं धनुर्विदुद्रणोपामम्।

प्रगृहा शरमुं च तिपुरघं यथा शिवम् ॥ 11  ॥

Nay, covered all over with dust, the whole of Dáśaratha's army stood dumbfounded, as it were. At that time only Vasiṣtha and the other sages as well as the king including his four sons retained their consciousness, all the rest on that spot became unconscious, as it were. In that dreadful darkness the aforesaid army of Dáśaratha, which was actually covered with dust, as well as the king beheld the terrible-looking sage Paraśurāma (son of Jamadagni), the destroyer of the Kṣatriyas, born in the race of Bhrgu, wearing matted locks formed into a coil at the crown, unassailable as Mount Kailāsa, irresistible as the destructive fire raging at the time of universal dissolution, blazing as it were with effulgence and as such difficult to gaze upon for common men, with an axe on his right shoulder and a bow on his left and holding in his hand a fierce shaft, resembling streaks of lightning, like another Lord Śiva, the Destroyer of the demon Tripura. (15-19)

तं दृष्ट्वा भीमसंकाशं ज्वलन्तमिव पावकम्।

वसिष्ठप्रभुखा विषा जमहोमपरायणा: ॥ 20  ॥

संगता मुनय: सर्वे संजजल्पूर्धो मिथः ।

कौच्चत् पितृवधामर्षी क्षत्र नोत्सादिष्यति ॥ 21  ॥

Seeing the sage, terrible of aspect and blazing like fire, all the Brāhmaṇa seers and

sages, given to the practice of austerities and Homa (offering oblations to the sacred fire), with Vasiṣṭha at their head, collected at one place and talked to one another, "Let us hope, full of indignation over the assassination of his father, he is not going to exterminate the Kṣatriya race over again. (20-21)

पूर्वे क्षत्रवधं कृत्वा गतमन्युर्गतब्रर: ।

क्षत्रस्यौलादनं भूयो न खल्वस्य चिक्तीषितम् ॥ 22  ॥

"Surely it is not his intention to wipe out the Kṣatriyas once more, since having massacred the Kṣatriyas in the past, he has his anger appeased and has been rid of his agony caused by his father's death." (22)

एवमुक्त्वाध्यमादाय भार्यं भीमदर्शनम्।

त्रषयो राम रामेति मधुरं वावयमवुवन् ॥ 23  ॥

Talking in this strain and taking in their hands water to wash his hands with, the sages accosted the scion of Bhrgu, who wore a terrible aspect, in sweet words, "Rāma, O Rāma!" (23)

प्रतिगृहा तु तां पूजामृषिदत्तां प्रतापवान्।

रामं दारशर्थि रामो जामद्रग्रधो५थभात् ॥ 24  ॥

While accepting that honour done by the sages, Vasistha and others, the glorious Paraśurāma, son of Jamadagni, spoke as follows to Śri Rāma, the eldest son of Dásaratha. (24)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारण्डे

चतुस्सातितम: सर्ग: ॥ 14  ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-four in the Balakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.



पऊसमितिम: सर्गे:

Canto LXXV

Turning a deaf ear to Daśaratha's prayer, Paraśuárāma relates the history of the bows belonging to Lords Śiva and Viṣṇu and challenges Śri Rāma to string the bow of Lord Viṣṇu in his possession

राम द्वाराशे वीर वीर्यैं ते श्यते०ऊदुतम्।

धनुषो भेदनं चैव निखिलने मया श्रुतम्॥ 1  ॥

“O Rama, O valiant son of Daśaratha, your prowess is reported to be marvellous and your feat in the shape of breaking the bow of Lord Śiva has also been heard of by me in all its details. (1)

तद्बुद्धमचिन्चं च भेदनं धनुषस्थला।

तच्छुलाहमनुपासो धनुगृह्मापरं शुभम्।। 2  ॥

"Breaking the bow in the way you have done is indeed marvellous and cannot even be conceived by others. Hearing of it, I have arrived here, taking another sacred bow. (2)

तदिदं घोरसंकाशं जामदन्यं महढ़नु:।

पूर्यसर शरेषीव स्वबलं दर्शयस्व च।। 3  ॥

"Thefore, fitting this great and terrible-looking bow, received by me from Jamadagni, my father, with an arrow, simply draw it to its full length and demonstrate your might thereby. (3)

तदहं ते बलं दृष्टवा धनुषोउपस्य पूर्णे।

इद्रद्युर्दे प्रदास्यामि वीर्यलाध्महं तत ॥ 4  ॥

“Having witnessed that strength of yours in drawing this bow too at full length, I shall offer you a single combat which will bring credit to your valour.” (4)

तस्य तद् वचनं श्रुवा राजा दर्शयथस्तदा।

विषणणवदनो दीनः प्राङ्लिलविक्यमवबीत् ॥ 5  ॥

Hearing that challenge of Paraśurāma, King Daśaratha felt miserable and, pulling a long face, forthwith spoke with folded hands as follows: (5)

क्षत्रोषात् प्रशान्तस्त्वं ब्राह्मणश्र महातपा: । बालानां मम पुत्राणामभयं दत्तमूर्हसि ॥ 6  ॥

"Having given up your anger towards the Kṣatriyas, you have since grown very calm and, being a Brāhmana and a great ascetic too, you ought to give assurance of safety to my juvenile sons. (6)

भार्यालायां कुले जातः स्वाध्यायबतगालिनाम्।

सहस्त्रासे प्रतिज्ञा शरसं प्रश्रिक्षसवानसि ॥ 9  ॥

“Born in the line of the Bhārgavas (the scions of Bhrgu), distinguished for their study of the Vedas and sacred vows, you have relinquished the arms, giving your word of honour in this behalf to Indra. (7)

स त्वं धर्मपरी भूत्वा कश्यपाय वसुंधारम्।

दत्चा वनमुपाग्य महेन्द्रकृतकेतन: ॥ 8  ॥

"As such you set your mind on piety and gave away the dominion of the earth to Sage Kaśyapa and, retiring to the woods, took up your abode on Mount Mahendra. (8)

मम सर्वविनाशाय सम्यास्तं महामुने।

न चैकस्मिन् हते रामे सर्वे जीवामहे वयम् ॥ 9  ॥

"For my total annihilation, however, you have appeared here, O great sage ! And we shall all cease to live even if Rāma alone is killed by you." (9)

बुवलेवं दूराधे जामदान्य: प्रतापवान्।

अनावुद्य तु तद्वाकयं राममेवाध्यभावत ॥ 10  ॥

Turning a deaf ear to his entreaty, however, even though Dáasarathaprayed as aforesaid, the glorious Paraśurāma (son of Jamadagni) continued to address Śri Rāma alone and said: (10)



इमे डे धनुपी श्रेष्ठे दिख्ये लोकापिभूजिते।

दृढ़े बलवती मुख्ये सुकृते विश्वकर्मणा ॥ 11  ॥

"These two excellent heavenly bows (one of which was broken by you the other day, the other being with me), strong, powerful and foremost as they are, were adored by the whole world and were skilfully manufactured by Viśwakarma. (11)

अनुसूटे सुरैरकं व्यम्बकाय युयुसवे।

त्रिपुरां नरश्रेष्ठ धर्मं काकुत्शथ यत्प्वया ॥ 12  ॥

"One of them, which has been broken by you, O scion of Kakutstha, was handed over by the gods to Lord Śiva (the three-eyed divinity), eager to fight with the demon Tripura, and ultimately succeeded in killing him, O jewel among men! (12)

इर्वे द्वितीयं दुर्भर्ष विण्योदरं सुरोतमः ।

तदिदं वैषणवं राम धनु: परपुरंजयम् ॥ 13  ॥

"This second one, hard to prevail against, was given by the foremost of the gods to Lord Viṣṇu. This, which you behold in my hand, is the same bow of Lord Viṣṇu, which is able to reduce the enemy's stronghold, O Rāma! (13)

समानसारं काकुत्थ रौरेण धनुषा तिवदम्।

तदा तु देवता: सर्वा: पृच्छित्त स्म यितामाहम् ॥ 14  ॥

शितिकणठव्य विष्णोश्र बलावलिनिश्रध्या।

अधिप्रायं तु विज्ञाय देवतानां पितामहः ॥ 15  ॥

विरोधं जनयामास तयो: सत्यवतां वर: ।

विरोधे तु महद् युद्धमभवद् रोमहर्षेणम् ॥ 16  ॥

शितिकणठव्य विष्णोश्र परस्यजर्यैषिणो: ।

तदा तु जृधितं शैलं धनुभीमपराक्रमम् ॥ 17  ॥

हुंकारेण महादेव: स्तधितोश्व जिलोचना: ।

देवैस्तदा समागम्य सर्षिसकुः सचारणे: ॥ 18  ॥

याचितो प्रशनं तत्र जममतुती सुरोतमों ।

जृधितं तद्ध अनुर्दृष्टवा शैलं विद्युपराकमे: ॥ 19  ॥

अधिकं मेपिंर विद्युं देवा: सर्दिणणास्तथा ।

धनूं रूरस्तु संकृद्धो विदेक्षे महावश्या: ॥ 20  ॥

देवतातस्य राजर्षेदंदी हस्ते ससायकम् ।

इंदं च वैध्यांर ताम धनु: परपुरंजयम् ॥ 21  ॥

རྟོགས་ཆེ་བཀའི་ཟིན་མཐའ་ཀྱི་ཟིན་མཐའ་ཀྱི་ཟིན་མཐའ་ཀྱི་ཟེད་ཟིན་མཐའ་ཀྱི་ཟེད་ཟིན་མཐའ་ཀྱྱི་ཟེད་ཟིན་མཐའ་ཀྱྱི་ཟེད་ཟིན་ཀྱི་ཟེད་ཟིན་མཐའ་ཀྱྱི་ཟེད་ཟེད་ཟིན་མཐའ་ཀྱྱི་ཟེད་ཟིན་མཁའ་ཀྱྱི་ཟེད་ཟིན་མཁའ་ཀྱྱི་ཟེད་བྱིན་ཟེད་བྱིན་ཟེད་བྱིན་ཟེད་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟེད་བྱིན་ཟེད་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟེད་བྱིད་ཟེར་ཟེད་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟེད་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟེད་བྱིན་ཟེད་བྱིད་ཟེར་ཟེད་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིད་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་བྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱྩིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་ཟེར་ཟྱིན་�

* VÅLMÍKI-RÅMÅYANA *

of the royal sage Devarāta born in the line of the Videha kings. Lord Viṣnu, on the other hand, O Rāma, made over this superb bow of His own, capable of subduing the enemy's stronghold, as a trust to Rīcika, a scion of sage Bhrgu. The highly glorious Rīcika in his turn bestowed the heavenly gift on his own son, the high-souled Jamadagni, my father, who was too good to retaliate a wrong and had therefore no use for it. Reckoning my father, who had given up the use of arms and was richly endowed with spiritual energy earned through his austerities, as a common man, Arjuna (more popularly known by the name of Sahasrabāhu because of his thousand arms) caused his death. Hearing of my father's most cruel and unmerited death, I for my part uprooted more than once (as many as twenty-one times) out of indignation the Kṣatriyas even as they were born. (14-24)

पृथिवीं चाशिलां प्राय कश्यपाय महात्मने।

यज्ञस्पतेनेउदरं राम दक्षिणां पुण्यकर्मणे॥ 25  ॥

"Having acquired dominion over the entire globe in this way, I gifted it, O Râma, to the high-souled sage Kaśyapa of meritorious deeds by way of sacrificial fee at the end of a sacrifice which I performed in atonement

for the great bath of blood. (25)

दरूचा महेन्द्रनिलयसत्पोबलसम्बित: ।

श्रुत्वा तु धनुषो भेदे ततोउंहे द्रुतमागतः ॥ 26  ॥

“Nay, having made the gift, I took up my abode on Mount Mahendra. Richly endowed with spiritual energy earned through austerities in the meantime, however, I expeditiously arrived here from that distant place on hearing of the breaking of the bow. (26)

तदेवं बैषणां राम चिनुपैतामहं महत्।

श्रत्रधर्मे पुरस्कृत्य गृहीष्व धनुकतमम् ॥ 27  ॥

Placing above all else the noble duty of a Kṣatriya (which consists in accepting the challenge of a warrior to a duel in a righteous cause), O Rāma, take in your hand the celebrated and superb bow belonging to Lord Viṣṇu, inherited by me through my father from my grandfather. (27)

योजस्व सन्तु: श्रेष्ठ शरं परपुरंजस्य।

यदि शक्तो प्रस काकुत्स्थ इन्द्रं दास्यामि ने ततः ॥ 28  ॥

"And fit the arrow, capable of reducing the stronghold of an enemy, to this foremost of bows provided you are equal to it, O scion of Kakutstha ! Then alone I shall offer a single combat to you." (28)

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारण्डे

पखसातितम: सर्ग: ॥ 95  ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-five in the Bálakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rāsi and the oldest epic.



घटूसमितिम: सर्गै:

Canto LXXVI

Fitting the arrow to the bow of Lord Viṣṇu and declaring it as unfailing,

Śrī Rāma asks Paraśuārama to point out at whom it may be

discharged, and at the instance of the latter puts an

end to his title to the (ethereal) worlds earned

by him through his austerities. Recognizing

Śrī Rāma to be no other than Lord Viṣṇu

and taking leave of him, Paraśurāma

withdraws to Mount Mahendra

in order to resume

his austerities

श्रुत्वा तु जामदान्यस्य वाक्यं दाशराश्रितस्तदा।

गौरावद् यब्नितकधः पिन्तू राममथावबीत्।। 1  ॥

Hearing the challenge of Jamadagni's son, Śri Rāma (son of Daśaratha), of course, who remained tongue-tied on that occasion out of regard for his father, now spoke to Paraśurāma as follows: (1)

कृतवानस यत् कर्म श्रुतवानसि भार्गव।

अनुक ध्यामहे ब्रह्ना चितुर्जानुण्यमास्थित: ॥ 2  ॥

"I have heard, O scion of Bhru, of the work that you have done, intent on repaying the debt you owed to your father by avenging his death. We approve of it, O holy Brâhmana! (2)

वीर्यंतीनमिवाश्रक्तं क्षत्रधर्मेण भागवं।

अवज्ञानासि मे तेजः पश्य मेउघ पराक्रमम् ॥ 3  ॥

“Since, however, you despise me—devoted as I am to the duty of a Kṣatriya and, therefore, chary of speech in the presence of a holy Brāhmaṇa like you—as powerless, as though lacking in virility, O scion of Bhṛgu, pray, witness my glory and prowess today.” (3)

इत्युक्ता राघव: कुब्जो भार्थव्य सरायुधम्।

शरं च प्रतिजग्रह हस्तालक्षुपराकमः ॥ 4  ॥

Saying so and growing indignant, Śri Rāma, a scion of Raghu, of swift prowess seized the excellent weapon (bow) as well as the arrow from his hand and further withdrew the divine energy* of Paraśurāma (a scion of the sage Bhrgu). (4)

आरोष्य स धनु रामः शर्गे सन्ये चकार है।

जामदान्यं ततो रामं रामः कुब्जोउब्बीविद्यम् ॥ 5  ॥

Stringing the bow, the celebrated Śri Rāma set the arrow to the string: so the tradition goes. Getting angry, Śri Rāma then spoke to Paraśurāma (son of Jamadagni) as follows : (5)

ब्राह्याणो3सीति पून्यो मे विध्धामिरकृतेन च।

तस्म्याछ्को न ते राम मोक्नुं प्राणहरं शरम् ॥ 6  ॥

"You are worthy of respect to me in that you are a Brāhmaṇa and also because of your kinship with Viśwāmitra, who is the maternal uncle of your father. Therefore, I dare not hurl the deadly arrow at you, O Rāma! (6)

* We read in the Padma-Purāṇa—

'सृत्रकृत्वा दाँव वैधाया शक्रवा ततुरताया सह । जगाद वैधार्यां चारां विनयेन च लीताया ॥'

'Saying so, Śrī Rāma seized in sport, yet with modesty, the bow of Lord Viṣṇu alongwith the divine energy of the same Lord, that had existed in him so far, O Pārvaṭi!'

This is also borne out by verse 11 of this very Canto.



इमां वा स्वद्धिंत राम तपोबलसमर्पितान्।

लोकानप्रतिमान् वाथि हनिष्यामिति मे मति: ॥ 9  ॥

"I shall as an alternative take away, O Rāma, your present capacity of unobstructed movement in all the three worlds or put an end to your title to the peerless ethereal worlds, duly acquired by dint of asceticism: such is my mind. (7)

न ह्यं वैष्णोवे दिव्यः शरः परपुरंजयः ।

मोघः पतति वीयेंण बलदार्पविनाशन: १८ ॥

"This transcendent arrow of Lord Viṣṇu, capable as it is of reducing the stronghold of an enemy and crushing the might as well as the pride of an adversary by its unique power, never goes without hitting its mark."

(8)

वरायुध्धरं रामं र्रष्टुं सर्विणगना: सुरा:।

पितामहे पुरस्कृत्य समेतास्तत्र सर्वशः ॥ 9  ॥

Placing Brahmā (the progenitor of the entire creation) at their head, all the gods, accompanied by hosts of Rṣis, assembled there in their aerial cars in order to behold Śri Rama wielding the superb weapon of Lord Viṣnu. (9)

गन्धर्वोपसरस्थेत्र विस्द्वाराणकिंनरा:।

यक्षराश्रसनागश्र तद् रूष्टुं महदद्भुतम् ॥ 10  ॥

Gandharvas and celestial dancing girls as well as Siddhas, Čaranas and Kinnaras as also Yakṣas, ogres and Nāgas too collected there in order to witness that great marvel. (10)

जडीकृते तदा लोके रामे वरधनुधरे।

निर्वींयों जामदरन्योउसी रामो राममुदैक्षत ॥ 11  ॥

People gathered there, having been stunned at that time with fear at the thought of the dire consequences that might follow from the show of valour on the part of Śri Rāma, when Śri Rāma took up the superb bow of Lord Viṣṇu, the celebrated Paraśurama, son of Jamadagni, now rendered powerless, looked with wonder at Śri Rāma. (11)

तेनोभिप्रतीर्वीर्षालाजामदन्यो जडीकृत: ।

रामं कमलपत्राक्षं मन्दं मन्दमुवाच ह ॥ 12  ॥

Dazed by the brilliance of Śri Rāma, due to his having been rendered powerless, the son of Jamadagni spoke in a low tone as follows to Śri Rāma, whose eyes resembled the petals of a lotus: (12)

काश्यपाव मवा दत्ता यदा पूर्वे वर्धुधरा।

विषये मे न वस्त्वाभिति मां काश्यपोउब्वीत् ॥ 13  ॥

"When in the past the dominion of the earth was bestowed by me on Sage Kaśyapa, Kaśyapa spoke to me as follows: 'You must no longer inhabit my dominion.' (13)

सोड़ं रुग्वच: कुर्बन् पृथिव्यां न वसे निशगाम।

तदाप्रभुति काकुत्स्थ कुता मे काश्यपस्य ह ॥ 14  ॥

"Enjoined thus and obeying the command of my preceptor, Kaśyapa, I do not remain on earth at night from that time onward inasmuch as a pledge has been taken by me to that effect before Kaśyapa, which is a well-known fact, O Rāma! (14) तामिमां मृद्ति वीर हन्तु नाईस राषव। मनोजवं गामिष्यामि महेन्द्र पवैतोनमम् ॥ १.५ ॥

"Be pleased, therefore, O heroic scion of Raghu, not to put an end to my present unhampered movement in all the three worlds. I shall retire to Mount Mahendra, the foremost of mountains, with the speed of thought. (15)

लोकास्त्वप्रतिमा राम निर्जितास्तपसा माया।

जहि ताऊसमुखेन मा भूत् कालस्य पर्यय: ॥ 16  ॥

"Peerless worlds have actually been earned by me by dint of asceticism, O Rāma! Put an end to my title to them by means of your superb shaft. Let there be no loss of time. (16)

अक्षय्ये मधुहतारं ज्ञानामि त्वां सुरेश्वगम्।

धनुपौजस्य परामशगत् स्वस्ति तेजस्तु परंतप ॥ १७१

एते सुरगणा: सर्वे निरिक्षन्ते समागता: ।

त्वामप्रतिमकर्माणमप्रतिक्रद्धमाहवे ॥ 18  ॥

*BÁLAKÂNDA*

"From the fact of your having not only seized but also strung and drawn this bow of Lord Viṣṇu, which could be strung by none else, I conclude you to be no other than the imperishable Lord Viṣṇu, the suzerain Lord of gods), the Slayer of the demon Madhu. Let everything be well with you, O chastiser of foes! All these hosts of gods gathered together here are looking at you, whose deeds are incomparable and who are unrivalled in combat. (17-18)

न चेयं तव काकुत्स्थ जीडा भवितुमहित।

त्वया जैतोक्यनाथेन यदहं विमुखीकृत: ॥ 19  ॥

"This powerlessness of mine in your presence, O scion of Kakutstha, cannot be a matter for shame to me, since I stand worsted by none else than the Lord of all the three worlds. (19)

शरमप्रतिमं राम मोतुभहींस सूत्रत।

शरमोक्षे गमिष्यामि महेन्द्र पवैतोत्तमम् ॥ 20  ॥

"Be pleased, O Rāma of noble vows, to discharge your matchless arrow. On your having discharged the arrow I shall return to Mount Mahendra, the foremost of mountains."

(20)

तथा बृवति रामे तु जामदन्ये प्रतापवान्।

रामो द्वारशिथः श्रीमांशिक्षेप शरमुतमम् ॥ 21  ॥

इत्यार्थे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारण्डे

षदूससितिम: सर्ग: ॥ 76  ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-Six in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rṣi and the oldest epic.

* VÄLMÍKI-RÄMÄYANA *

ससससिततम: सर्गै:

Canto LXXVII

On the departure of Parašurāma, Śri Rāma hands over the bow of Lord Viṣṇu to Varuṇa (the god of water) and, sending his army ahead, King Daśaratha enters Ayodhyā. After some days Prince Yudhājit, Bharata's maternal uncle takes away Bharata and Śatrughna to his father's capital

गते रामे प्रशान्तात्या रामो द्वाशरथधनु:।

वरूणायाम्येयाय ददौ हरेले महायशा: ॥ 1  ॥

Parasūrāma having left, the highly illustrious Śrī Rāma (son of Daśaratha), whose mind was completely at rest, made over as a trust the bow in his hand to Varuna, the god of water, of immeasurable strength. (1)

अभिवाद्ध ततो यांति वसिष्ठप्रमुखात्युर्धीन्।

प्रितर विकलं दृष्ट्वा प्रोवाच रघुनन्दनः ॥ 2  ॥

Greeting the sages headed by Vasiṣtha and seeing his father (who had apparently failed to notice the discomfiture and departure of Paraśurāma) perturbed over the menacing attitude of Paraśurāma, Śrī Rāma (a scion of Raghu) then submitted to his father as follows: (2)

जामदान्यो गतो राम: प्रयातु चतुरंगिणी।

अयोध्याभ्युखी सेना त्वया नाधेन पालिता ॥ 3  ॥

"Paraśurāma, son of Jamadagni, has departed. Let the army consisting of four limbs (viz., elephants, chariots, horsemen and foot soldiers) and protected by you, its master, therefore, march in the direction of Ayodhya." (3)

रामस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा राजा द्वशः: सुतम्।

बाहुभ्यां सम्परिष्वच्य मृत्युंपाप्राय राधवम् ॥ 4  ॥

Hearing the request of Śri Rama, King Daśaratha closely folded in his arms his son, the foremost of Raghu's race, and smelt his head as a gesture of affection.

(4)

गतो राम इति श्रुत्वा हुटः प्रमुदितो नृपः ।

पुनर्जांत तदा मेने पुत्रमात्यानमेव च ॥ 5  ॥ ॥

Delighted, nay, overjoyed to hear that Paraśurāma had already left, the king thought his son as well as himself reborn on that occasion. (5)

चोदयामास तां सेनां जगामाशु ततः पुरीम्।

पताकाध्विजर्नीं रचयं वृदीदूष्टनिनादिताम् ॥ 6  ॥

सित्कराजयधारयां प्रक्रौणंकुसुमोक्कारम्।

राजप्रवेशसुमुखे: पौरैमेंईलपाधिपिधः ॥ 7  ॥

स्मयूगर्ण प्राविशद् राजा जनोर्षे: समलंकृताम्।

पौरै: प्रत्युद्रतो दूरं द्विजैश पुराविसिधः ॥ 8  ॥

पुरैरनुगतः श्रीमान् श्रीमद्धिक्ष महायशाः।

प्रविवेश गृहं राजा हिमवल्सदुर्गं प्रियम् ॥ 9  ॥

He urged his army forward and then speedily reached his delightful capital. The king presently entered in state the city decorated with flags and buntings and rendered noisy by fanfares of trumpeters. It looked charming with its highways sprinkled with water and was strewn with heaps of flowers. It was brimful with citizens with their faces blooming over the return of their king and carrying auspicious articles in their hands, and was fully graced with multitudes of men. Met far in advance by the citizens as well as by Brâhmanas inhabiting the capital, and followed by his glorious sons, the glorious and highly illustrious king now entered his beloved palace vying with the Himâlaya mountain (in whiteness and height). (6-9)

नन्द्र स्वजनै राजा गृहे कामै: सूपूजितः।

कोसल्या च सुमित्रा च केकेवी च सुमध्यमा ॥ 10  ॥

वधूप्रतिप्रहे सुका याङ्गाना राजयोषितः ।

ततः सीतां महाभागामूमितां च यशप्रिस्वनी ॥ 11  ॥



<table><tr><td>कुशध्वजसुते</td><td>चोभे</td><td>जगूहुर्णपयोक्षितः।</td></tr><tr><td>मंगलालापनैईमैः</td><td>शोभिताः</td><td>क्षीमवाससः॥ 12 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>देवातयतनान्याशु</td><td>सर्वासः</td><td>प्रत्यपूजयन्।</td></tr><tr><td>अभिवादाधभवाद्यांश्रु</td><td>सर्वा</td><td>गजसुतास्तदा॥ 13 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>रामेर मुदिताः</td><td>सर्वां</td><td>भर्तुभिः सदिता रहः।</td></tr><tr><td>कृतदाताः</td><td>कृतास्वाश्रु</td><td>ससूहूजनाः॥ 14 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>शुश्रष्ममाणाः</td><td>पितरं</td><td>वर्तेयन्ति नरर्षभाः।</td></tr><tr><td>कल्यचित्चथ</td><td>कालस्य</td><td>राजा दर्शस्थः सुतम्॥ 15 ॥</td></tr></table>

Duly entertained with luxuries by his own people, the king rejoiced at his house. Kausalyā and Sumitrā as well as the graceful Kaikeyi and whatever other queens there were busied themselves with the ceremonious reception of their daughters-in-law. Thereupon the queens conducted into the gynaecuem the highly blessed Sitā and the illustrious Urmilā as well as both the daughters of Kuśadhwaja, Mândavi and Śrutakirti. All those queens forthwith got the brides to offer worship in the temples inside as well as outside the gynaecuem—the brides, who were greeted with benedictions pronounced by the priests, looked splendid after having offered oblations to the sacred fire in order to solemnize their entry into the gynaecuem and were clad in silken robes. Having saluted on that occasion those who deserved to be saluted, all the princesses without exception happily enjoyed life with their husbands in their private apartments. Duly married and taught the use of various missiles and weapons and endowed with riches, the princes, who were jewels among men, lived in the company of their friends and relatives, rendering service to their father. Some time after this, one day, King Daśaratha, the delight of the Raghus, spoke to Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi as follows: (10-15)

भरतं केकयीपुत्रमब्रवीद् रघुनन्दन:।

अयं केकयराजस्य पुत्रो वसति पुत्रक ॥ 16  ॥

त्वां नेतृमापातो वीरो युधार्जिमातुलस्तत।

श्रुला दशरथ्यैतद् भरतः केकयीस्तु: ॥ 17  ॥

गमनायाधिचकाम शत्रुघसहितस्तदा।

आपृच्छ्य पितरं शूरो रामं चाकिल्ट कारिणम् ॥ 18  ॥

मानुश्रायि नरश्रेष्ठः शत्रुघसहितो ययौ।

युधार्जित् प्राय्य भरतं सशत्रुञ्चं प्रहर्षित: ॥ 19  ॥

स्वपुरं प्राविशद् वीर: पिता तस्य तृतीष ह।

गते च भरते रामो लक्ष्मणघ्र महाबल: ॥ 20  ॥

पितरं देवसंकाशं पूजयामासतुस्तदा।

पितुराजां पुरस्कृत्य पौरकायर्यिण सर्वेश: ॥ 21  ॥

चकार राम: सर्वांणि प्रियायण च हितानि च।

मातृभ्यो मातृकार्याणि कृत्वा परमयन्धिनतः ॥ 22  ॥

गृह्लणां गुरुकार्याणि काले काले3ववैक्षत।

एवं दशराश: प्रतीते ब्राह्मणा नैगमास्तथा ॥ 23  ॥

रामस्य शीलवृत्तेन सर्वे विषयवासिनः ।

तेषामतियशा लोके राम: सत्यपराक्रमः ॥ 24  ॥

स्वयंभूरिव भूतानां बभूव रुणवतर: ।

रामश्र सीतया सार्थ विजहार बहूनुतून् ॥ 25  ॥

मनस्वी तद्तनपानस्तथा हृदि समर्पितः ।

प्रिया तु सीता रामस्य द्वारा: चितुकृता इति ॥ 26  ॥

गुणगाङ्गपुणाचापि प्रीतिभ्योरोभिवर्धते ।

तत्सयश भर्ता द्विरुणं हृदये परिवर्तते ॥ 27  ॥

"This son of the king of Kekaya, the heroic Yudhājit, your maternal uncle, who has come to take you to his father's capital, is tarrying here in the hope of being allowed to take you." Hearing this remark of Daśaratha, Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, forthwith got ready to depart alongwith Śatrughna. Nay, taking leave of his father, King Daśaratha and Śri Rāma, who did great things without much exertion, as well as of all his three mothers, Kausalyā, Sumitrā and Kaikeyi, the heroic Bharata, a jewel among men, left with Śatrughna for the kingdom of Kekaya. Highly rejoiced to get hold of Bharata alongwith Śatrughna, the valiant Yudhājit reached and duly entered his town, and his father felt gratified at this. Bharata as well as Śatrughna having left, the very mighty Rāma and Laksmanā began to serve their god-like father when the occasion demanded it. Placing his father's command above all else, Śri Rāma



ever did in everyway all business relating to the citizens, which was dear to them as well as conducive to their interests. Doing all the work of his three mothers for their sake, Śrī Rāma, who was highly self-restrained, attended from time to time the important business of his elders. In this was King Daśaratha, the Brāhmanas as well as the traders—in fact, all the people of the kingdom of Ayodhyā were pleased with the disposition and conduct of Śrī Rāma. Śrī Rāma, who was endowed with true unfailing valour, outshone all his brothers in reputation and, like Brahmā, the self-born creator, excelled all created beings in merit. The high-minded Śrī Rāma, whose heart was set on his spouse and who stood enthroned in her heart, enjoyed life with her for many months. Sitaśa was dear to Śrī Rāma as a partner made available to him by his father. Nay, because of her manifold virtues and comeliness of form, his affection for her grew all the more. Her husband too (because of his excellences and lovely appearance) gained a doubly

secure grip in her heart. (16-27)

अन्तर्गतमपि व्यक्तमाख्याति हृदयं हृदा।

तस्य भूयो विशेषेण भैथिलो जनकात्मजा।

देवताधिः समा रूपे सीता शीरिव रूपिणी ॥ 28  ॥

Sitā, the princess of Mithilā and daughter of Janaka, who compared with goddesses in bodily charm and was beauty-incarnate, as it were, could vividly read in minute detail with her mind even that which existed in the inmost heart of Śri Rama. (28)

तया स राजर्षिसुतीशिकामया

समेयिवानुनभराजकन्या । 3तोव राम: श्रूशुभे मुद्रान्वितो

विभु: श्रिया विष्णुरिवामरेश्र: ॥ 21  ॥

United in wedlock with that foremost princess, who was the sole object of his love and whose love was centred in him, Śri Rāma, the aforesaid son of King Dáśaratha (a royal sage), looked most charming and full of joy, even as the all-pervading Viṣnu, the suzerain Lord of gods, in the company of Śri, the goddess of fortune. (29)

इल्यार्थी श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये बालकारणे

समससितिम: सर्ग: ॥ 77  ॥

Thus ends Canto Seventy-seven in the Bâlakānda of the glorious Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki, the work of a Rsi and the oldest epic.

बालकारणं सम्पूर्णम्

End of Bâlakāndā